Exploring the “Internet from space” with Hypatia
Simon Kassing∗, Debopam Bhattacherjee∗, André Baptista Águas, Jens Eirik Saethre, Ankit Singla
ETH Zürich
ABSTRACT
SpaceX, Amazon, and others plan to put thousands of satellites
in low Earth orbit to provide global low-latency broadband Inter-
net. SpaceX’s plans have matured quickly, such that their under-
deployment satellite constellation is already the largest in history,
and may start offering service in 2020.
The proposed constellations hold great promise, but also present
new challenges for networking. To enable research in this exciting
space, we present Hypatia, a framework for simulating and visual-
izing the network behavior of these constellations by incorporating
their unique characteristics, such as high-velocity orbital motion.
Using publicly available design details for the upcoming net-
works to drive our simulator, we characterize the expected behavior
of these networks, including latency and link utilization fluctuations
over time, and the implications of these variations for congestion
control and routing.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Networks →Network simulations; Network performance
analysis; Network dynamics; Topology analysis and generation;
Packet-switching networks.
KEYWORDS
Low Earth orbit satellite, LEO, Internet broadband constellation,
LEO network simulation, LEO network visualization
ACM Reference Format:
Simon Kassing∗, Debopam Bhattacherjee∗, André Baptista Águas, Jens
Eirik Saethre, Ankit Singla. 2020. Exploring the “Internet from space” with
Hypatia. In ACM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC ’20), October 27–
29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3419394.3423635
1
INTRODUCTION
The Internet is potentially taking “one giant leap” into space, with
plans afoot for large satellite constellations to blanket the globe with
low-latency broadband Internet. Numerous competitors have dis-
closed efforts along these lines, including SpaceX [70], Amazon [8],
∗A coin toss decided the order of the first two authors.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8138-3/20/10...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3419394.3423635
and Telesat [74]. With 400+ satellites already in orbit, and an increas-
ing launch cadence, SpaceX’s Starlink constellation is promising
limited availability of its Internet service already in 2020 [23]. It is
thus unsurprising that these ambitious plans for an “Internet from
space” have captured the public imagination [10, 28, 55, 62, 75].
While the use of satellites for Internet connectivity is as old
as the Internet itself1, the under-construction constellations differ
fundamentally from past efforts. The distinctions are rooted in
the recent improvements in enabling technologies, as well as the
goals, but manifest themselves deeply in the design. Unlike existing
satellite networks [35–37], the new ones are targeting not only
traditional niches such as shipping, satellite telephony, and limited
connectivity for rural areas, but also mass market broadband that
not only addresses these global coverage issues, but also competes
with current terrestrial networks in many markets.
The first design manifestation of this goal is scale: to provision
enough access bandwidth for their larger target user population,
the new systems need many more satellites than past ones. Starlink,
with its hundreds of satellites, is already the largest ever satellite
fleet in space history, but eventually, the largest planned constel-
lations will each comprise thousands of satellites [8, 70]. This has
only become possible due to favorable trends in space technology,
primarily, satellite miniaturization, and reduced launch costs.
The goal of competing outside traditional niches has another
important design consequence: operation in low Earth orbit (LEO),
at most 2,000 km above Earth’s surface. This is essential for latencies
to be comparable to terrestrial networks instead of the hundreds of
milliseconds that geostationary orbits (GEO) incur. LEO operation,
in turn, further reinforces the need for large scale: from GEO, each
satellite is visible to a large terrestrial area, but bringing satellites
closer to the Earth necessarily reduces each satellite’s coverage.
Large LEO constellations promise global coverage at low-latency
and high-bandwidth. However, realizing the full potential of these
networks requires addressing new research challenges posed by
their unique dynamics. In such constellations, each satellite orbits
the Earth every ∼100 minutes, traveling at ∼27,000 kmph. This
high-velocity movement of satellites creates not only high churn in
the ground to satellite links, but also fluctuations in the structure
of end-end paths as the satellites comprising the paths move.
At HotNets 2018, three position papers [5, 29, 44] highlighted
some of the networking challenges that could potentially arise in
LEO networks, e.g., in end-end congestion control [5] and intra-
constellation routing [29]. However, progress in precisely flesh-
ing out these challenges and addressing them faces a substantial
roadblock: lack of network analysis tools that incorporate the dy-
namic behavior of LEO networks. This creates a substantial risk
1An early satellite network, SATNET, formed an initial segment of the Internet, and in
fact, provided the key motivation for Cerf-Kahn’s work on the foundational Internet
Protocol: interconnecting networks as different as ARPANET, PRNET, and SATNET to
each other [1].

IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Kassing and Bhattacherjee et al.
that instead of networking research laying out the potential future
trajectories for the industry, research will rather lag the industry’s
rapid strides. Thus, to help accelerate research on LEO networks,
we developed Hypatia2, an analysis framework with simulation
and visualization modules. Hypatia provides a packet-level LEO
network simulator based on ns-3, as well as several types of net-
work visualizations based on Cesium [13], that serve to provide
intuition about such networks.
We use Hypatia to analyze the three largest proposed LEO
networks: Starlink, Kuiper, and Telesat. Our analysis uses the reg-
ulatory information these companies have filed with governing
bodies like the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in the
United States, and the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU). These filings [47–49, 68, 69, 72] disclose the orbital parame-
ters that describe the structure of the planned constellations. Our
simulations of these networks reveal the impact of LEO dynamics
on varying path RTTs and packet reordering, as well as fluctuations
in available bandwidth along end-end paths. We discuss the impli-
cations of these observations for congestion control and routing.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We lay out the case for building network analysis tools for
upcoming LEO networks. As a first step towards meeting this
need, we develop Hypatia, an analysis framework capturing
the orbital dynamics of LEO networks.
• We use regulatory filings by the largest three planned LEO
networks to evaluate and visualize their networks.
• Using packet-level simulations, we analyze the behavior of
individual end-end connections across such networks in terms
of their changing latencies and path structure, and show how
this impacts congestion control negatively, even in the absence
of any competing traffic.
• Further, by simulating traffic constellation-wide, we show that
the changes in path structure result in a difficult problem for
routing and traffic engineering, as the utilization of paths and
links is highly dynamic.
• Hypatia’s visualizations aid intuition about the structure of
satellite trajectories and their impact on a constellation’s be-
havior, and pin-point traffic hotspots in the network and show
their evolution over time.
Satellite networking played an important role in laying the foun-
dations of the Internet, and may again provide the impetus for
substantial and exciting changes. We hope that Hypatia will serve
as an enabler for that work. Hypatia’s source code is available
online [40], together with our visualizations [7].
2
BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
LEO mega-constellations being a new problem area, we include
relevant background to aid our readers.
2.1
What makes an LEO satellite network?
A large LEO constellation may comprise hundreds to thousands of
satellites. These satellites are organized into a number of orbits. An
2The name is a tribute to an early leader in astronomy and mathematics, who is better
recognized as a commentator and teacher, rather than for her new inventions, in line
with the spirit of this work.
Fig. 1: Each satellite covers a cone defined by the minimum angle
of elevation, 𝑙. A satellite uses steerable beams of different frequency
bands (e.g., fb1, fb2) to connect to different GSes.
orbit is described by: (a) its inclination, 𝑖, the angle its plane makes
with the Equator traveling northward; and (b) its height above sea-
level, ℎ< 2,000 km. Satellites within one orbit are uniformly spaced
out. A set of orbits with the same𝑖andℎ, and crossing the Equator at
uniform spacing from each other, is called an orbital shell. (Typically
orbits in a shell vary their elevation around ℎto avoid collisions
— these minor differences are largely immaterial to networking.)
Large constellations may deploy one or more such shells. This
description only captures a sub-class of LEO constellations, but all
recently proposed constellations fit this sub-class.
Each satellite uses radio up/down links to communicate with
ground stations (GSes), as shown in Fig. 1. A satellite can only
connect to GSes from which it can be seen at sufficiently high
elevation in the sky, as defined by the minimum angle of elevation,
𝑙. A satellite directly overhead a GS is at elevation 90°, while one at
the horizon is at 0°. If the minimum elevation 𝑙= 40°, only GSes that
see a satellite at elevation 40° or higher in the sky can communicate
with it. Thus, smaller 𝑙values allow GSes to talk to satellites closer
to the horizon, while larger 𝑙values are more restrictive. However
smaller 𝑙values also have a downside: connections from lower
elevation experience reduced antenna gain and signal quality due
to beam contour widening and increased attenuation.
According to Kuiper’s FCC filings [46], each satellite will have
multiple antennas, with each antenna supporting multiple steerable
beams; the beam steering and frequency band allocation will be
software-defined, with the goal of maximizing throughput. Whether
each GS can also simultaneously connect to multiple satellites de-
pends on the type of GS: a user terminal uses a single phased-array
antenna, while an enterprise user or gateway terminal uses multiple
parabolic antennas with more flexibility [46].
Satellites also connect to each other, using laser inter-satellite
links (ISLs). An end-end path between two GSes comprises a radio
up-link from the source GS to the ingress satellite, followed by
zero or more laser ISLs, and then the egress radio down-link to the
destination GS.
2.2
The largest proposed constellations
To add concrete numbers to the above abstract description of LEO
constellations, we describe the design parameters for the largest
three proposed constellations.
SpaceX Starlink: Table. 1 details the first phase of Starlink, with
4,409 satellites planned across 5 orbital shells [66–69]. SpaceX is
currently deploying S1, with 1,584 satellites (72 orbits, each with
22 satellites), ℎ= 550 km, and 𝑖= 53°. The minimum elevation,
𝑙= 25°. S1 will cover most of the world’s population, but will not
extend service to less populated regions at high latitudes. This

Exploring the “Internet from space” with Hypatia
IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙
ℎ(𝑘𝑚)
𝑂𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡𝑠
𝑆𝑎𝑡𝑠/𝑜𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡
𝑖
S1
550
72
22
53°
S2
1,110
32
50
53.8°
Starlink
S3
1,130
8
50
74°
S4
1,275
5
75
81°
S5
1,325
6
75
70°
K1
630
34
34
51.9°
Kuiper
K2
610
36
36
42°
K3
590
28
28
33°
Telesat
T1
1,015
27
13
98.98°
T2
1,325
40
33
50.88°
Table 1: Shell configurations for Starlink’s first phase of deployment,
Kuiper, and Telesat. We shall frequently refer to the first shell for each
constellation, S1, K1, and T1, in the text.
coverage issue will be addressed by the higher inclination shells, S3-
S5. SpaceX’s stated plan is to deploy more than 42,000 satellites, but
it is unclear how much of this is posturing to secure spectrum [34].
Amazon Kuiper: Kuiper plans three shells, with a total of 3,236
satellites at slightly different operating heights [47–49]. Kuiper
entirely eschews connectivity near the poles, with all its shells hav-
ing inclinations under 52°. The FCC filings mention a few possible
values of 𝑙: “20(min)/30/35/45” [47].
Telesat: Telesat plans two shells with a total of 1,671 satellites [73],
roughly a fifth of which will cover the higher latitudes, using an
inclination of 98.98°, with the rest focused on improving capacity
at lower latitudes. Telesat plans 𝑙= 10°, but the feasibility of this
is unclear — unlike Starlink and Kuiper, whose filings detail how
to address beam contour and antenna gain changes for 𝑙≥25°,
Telesat’s filings thus far omit such information.
2.3
Unique dynamics of LEO networks
A satellite’s height, ℎ, determines its orbital velocity, and thus,
orbital period [56]. At ℎ= 550 km, the orbital velocity is more than
27,000 km/hr, and satellites complete an orbit around the Earth in
∼100 minutes [6]. As satellites travel fast across GSes, GS-satellite
links can only be maintained for a few minutes, after which they
require a handoff. ISLs also continuously change in length. The
Earth’s shape and orbital geometry results in satellites coming
closer at higher latitudes. This results in a continuous change in
their relative positions and hence the ISL lengths and latencies.
The end-end path between two GSes thus changes both in terms
of which satellites are involved, and in terms of the lengths of both
the GS-satellite links and the ISLs.
Mobility is, of course, well-studied in a variety of contexts, in-
cluding cellular networks, high-speed trains, drones and airplanes,
and swarms of mobile nodes. For many of these settings, there
are also models of mobility, together with simulation and analysis
infrastructure. However, LEO satellite mobility is unique for several
reasons:
• LEO mobility features much larger distances and velocities
than terrestrial mobile networks.
• Unlike most other settings, LEO networks’ core infrastructure
itself is mobile, rather than just the end-points.
• LEO mobility is predictable; this is not the case for the most
well-studied setting, cellular networks.
• LEO networks feature thousands of network switches (satel-
lites) capable of providing Tbps of connectivity. This scale is
far beyond other networked swarms.
Each previously well-studied setting features one or two of the
above characteristics, but not all of them. For instance, trains, and
to a lesser extent, airplanes, also feature predictable motion, but
none of the other characteristics.
2.4
Large LEO networks need new research
Commercial satellite networks already provide varied network ser-
vices. HughesNet [35] and Viasat [76] primarily serve areas poorly
connected by terrestrial fiber, as well as aircrafts and ships. These
are both GEO satellite constellations, and operating at 35,786 km,
they incur hundreds of milliseconds of latency. Besides, their per-
formance and service goals being different, their GEO satellites
are, by definition, stationary with respect to the Earth, and thus do
not feature LEO dynamics. Iridium [36, 37] operates in LEO, but
primarily offers satellite telephony rather than broadband Internet.
Iridium, with 82 satellites in operation, is the largest of the networks
that pre-date the new LEO mega-constellations.
Thus, no prior networks have all the features of the new LEO
networks, the largest of which are planned to operate thousands
of satellites instead of tens, and provide mass market low-latency
broadband Internet, rather than niche services. One of the upcom-
ing constellations, Starlink, already has more than 400 satellites
operational, and expects a public launch of their service as soon as
2020 [16, 23]. Over the long-term, such networks have the potential
to fundamentally change the Internet, making it crucial for research
to keep pace with the hectic pace of industry developments.
The networking community, recognizing this need, is indeed
ramping up research in this direction. While there is a large body or
earlier work from the 1990s on GEO and small LEO networks [2, 4,
14, 15, 18, 24, 43, 50, 53, 71, 78–80, 82], several position papers [5, 29,
44] have highlighted the new opportunities and challenges of mega-
constellations, e.g., in intra-constellation routing [29] and inter-
domain routing [44], and end-end congestion control [5]. Followup
work has since laid out novel proposals for topology design [6] and
Internet inter-domain routing [26] in this context.
2.5
We are missing the right analysis tools
Unfortunately, the networking community lacks the right tools to
attack many of the LEO networking challenges recent work has
pointed out. We need software to simulate the behavior of such
networks, so that we can deeply understand the problems, and new
research ideas can be evaluated. Understanding the packet-level
behavior of a network is obviously important for congestion control
research, but ultimately, practitioners also want to evaluate routing
and topology work in terms of how it impacts network packets, e.g.,
do some routing schemes cause more packet reordering, and thus,
ultimately result in poor performance?

IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Kassing and Bhattacherjee et al.
Unfortunately, there is no simulator that fully addresses these
needs. SNS3 [65] models GEO satellite communication channels,
but does not support LEO satellites or inter-satellite connectivity.
Another simulation effort [33] focused on the polar constellations
of interest in the nineties, and the problems of interest therein, e.g.,
connectivity across “seams” that result from satellites traveling
northward in one (longitudinal) hemisphere and southward in the
other. While we could have extended this work for our study of
modern LEO networks, we based Hypatia on the ns-3 platform to
benefit from its more active development and support. Note that
this prior work also did not analyze congestion control and traffic
engineering, nor did it provide visualizations beyond the below-
discussed SaVi tool [81]. A satellite mobility model is available for
ns-3 [61], which can convert satellite trajectories in a specific format
into a coordinate system compatible with ns-3. This capability
is useful, and we build on it by adding models for inter-satellite
and GS-satellite connections. Recent work on LEO inter-satellite
topologies [6] evaluated topologies only in terms of path hop-counts
and distances, not packet simulations. Likewise, work on inter-
domain routing [26] only modeled the network control messages
and path distances. Another effort [21] estimates the throughput
of new LEO networks using statistical methods, and minimizes
the number of GSes needed to support the throughput. It does not
account for network routing and transport dynamics.
We also need visualizations that help build sorely missing in-
tuition for these new networks. While there are many beautiful
visualizations, at least for Starlink [12, 22, 30, 32], most of these do
not focus on networking concepts such as the evolution of paths, uti-
lization, and congestion. The closest related work [29, 30] does not
simulate packet-level behavior, and does not provide source code
for its path-granularity computations or visualizations. NASA’s
GMAT [57] can be used to visualize trajectories of objects in space;
SaVi [81] can additionally render coverage of a satellite. However,
neither provides the ability to define the topology, model network
links, or run network-centric measurements.
While we expect that eventually the community will collect
measurements from real clients on LEO networks, this will not
alleviate the need for simulation and analysis tools. For a variety of
network contexts, such tools continue to be valuable to understand
existing phenomena, and to devise novel, hard-to-evaluate-in-the-
wild techniques.
3
HYPATIA ARCHITECTURE
To address the urgent need for tools that enable research on LEO
networks, we built Hypatia. Hypatia provides a packet-level sim-
ulator that incorporates LEO dynamics, and a visualization module
to aid intuition. The packet simulator is implemented as a module
for ns-3 [60]. It takes into account satellite trajectories, coverage
constraints for GS-satellite connectivity, and the structure of inter-
satellite connectivity. It can be used to implement and evaluate
novel ideas for satellite trajectory design, inter-satellite topology,
routing, and congestion control. The visualization component uses
Cesium [13] to render views of the trajectories, GS-perspective on
overhead satellites, end-end routes, evolving link utilization, and
available bandwidth on routes.
3.1
Setting up a simulated LEO network
At its simplest, Hypatia allows users to specify satellite trajectory
parameters and ground station locations. From these, it automat-
ically generates the state of each satellite over time in a space-
industry standard data format, the GS-satellite and ISL connectivity,
and time-varying forwarding state that decides the paths packets
take. We discuss what parts users need to modify for more complex
simulations.
TLE generation: A two-line element is a standard format for rep-
resenting the trajectory of an Earth-orbiting object [41]. For exist-
ing satellites and orbital debris, NORAD [59] regularly publishes
TLEs [42]. These TLEs are an input dependency for the satellite
mobility model we build on. This arrangement has thus far sufficed
for ns-3’s limited use in this setting: studying connectivity with
one existing satellite.
However, this meant that we needed to ourselves generate TLEs
for satellites that are not yet in orbit, but for which we know orbital
parameters in terms of the Keplerian orbital elements [54] from
the FCC or ITU filings made by the operators. Table. 1 shows the
values we obtained from these filings. We only include a simplified
subset of the parameters in the table; the remaining ones can be
easily derived from the symmetries in play, e.g., only using circular
orbits [47, 68], satellites in one orbit being uniformly spaced out,
and orbits being uniformly spread across the Equator.
We built a utility that accepts Keplerian orbital elements as in-
put, and outputs TLEs in the WGS72 world geodetic system stan-
dard [25]. To test that the output TLEs specify the same constellation
as the input Keplerian orbital elements, we use pyephem, a Python
library that can generate constellations from either the Keplerian
elements or TLEs.
ISL connectivity: Hypatia implements what we believe to be a
reasonable pattern of connectivity between satellites, but modi-
fying this to support arbitrary alternative interconnects is easy.
Our default implementation draws on past literature in satellite
networking, and information in the regulatory filings of the newly
proposed constellations.
The proposed mega-constellations hint at building 4 ISLs per
satellite. Starlink’s filings [68], for example, mention 4 silicon-
carbide components, and as recent work [6, 29] notes, these are
typically components for ISLs. We thus use 4 ISLs per satellite in
our default implementation.
Further, a large body of work in satellite networking indicates a
typical connectivity pattern for a satellite with 4 ISLs: two links to
the immediate neighbors in the orbit, and two links to satellites in
adjacent orbits, forming a mesh-like network [20, 21, 29, 30, 45, 51,
52, 63, 64, 77]. Recent work [6] has called the resulting mesh-like
connectivity “+Grid”. We use +Grid as the default ISL interconnect.
Hypatia also supports constellations eschewing ISLs entirely [31];
experiments demonstrating this are included in Appendix A. Fur-
ther, alternative ISL interconnects can be trivially supported in
Hypatia, if they do not involve dynamic ISLs, i.e., with satellites
connecting to different satellites over time. This is a realistic as-
sumption in most cases: ISL setup times can be tens of seconds, so
reconfiguring ISLs dynamically is avoided [6]. Nevertheless, if such
dynamic connectivity is desired, it will require modifying Hypatia.

Exploring the “Internet from space” with Hypatia
IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
GS-satellite connectivity: We currently simulate only static GSes
with multiple parabolic antennas, not user terminals with single
phased-array antennas that can be mobile [38]. However, Hypatia
can be easily extended to model such terminals. Hypatia inherits
from ns-3 the ability to impose sophisticated models on the GS-
satellite channel, e.g., for loss. Nevertheless, Hypatia’s current
implementation makes several simplifying assumptions about the
GS-satellite links:
• Hypatia supports multiple GSL (ground-satellite link) network
devices per satellite and GS. As default in our experiments,
we set one GSL network device for both satellites and ground
stations. Each network device can send packets to any other
GSL network device, as long as the forwarding plan allows
it. Additional connectivity restrictions can be imposed, e.g., to
restrict user terminals such that they can only connect to one
satellite at a time.
• Across satellites and ground stations, no connections interfere
with each other. While this is a strong assumption, Starlink and
Kuiper mention [47, 68] that frequency management will be
software-defined and done online to optimize towards this goal.
• Each GS can be configured to either: (a) connect to multiple
satellites; or (b) connect to its nearest satellite.
• Since many loss-free handoff techniques are known for other
mobile settings, when GS-Satellite connections are handed off,
there is no loss. Hypatia delivers in-flight packets from the now
out-of-reach satellite, while new packets stop arriving at it.
We make these simplifications, which relax practical constraints
and are favorable to LEO networks, for two reasons: (a) this frame-
work suffices to draw out many of the challenges; and (b) doing
anything else requires substantial design work that is not within
our scope, e.g., frequency management for this setting will likely
be studied extensively in future work, for which Hypatia can serve
as a vehicle.
Forwarding state: We compute the forwarding state of satellites
and ground stations at a configurable time granularity, with the
default being 100 ms. Note that this step converts what is necessarily
a continuous process of satellite motion into discrete intervals
where we check and update the forwarding state. In between these
intervals, the latencies are correctly calculated based on satellite
motion, but the paths being used may deviate from the shortest.
We discuss the implications of this experimentally in §5.3.
For every time interval, we use a networkx [58] module to gen-
erate the network graph, accounting for satellite positions and link
lengths between satellites and to ground stations. On this graph,
the forwarding state for each node can be calculated based on arbi-
trary routing strategies. Our current implementation simply uses
shortest-path routing, computed with the Floyd-Warshall algorithm.
The forwarding state changes are also added into ns-3’s discrete
event queue: at the first time the event fires, it reads new forward-
ing state into static routing table entries, and then adds the next
forwarding state change event at exactly the configured time in-
terval. Any routing strategy implementable with static routes can
be easily supported. This is also true for multi-path routing, but
obviously, would require additional logic to be implemented for
splitting traffic across these paths.
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
Slowdown (real s / virtual s)
Traffic goodput rate (Gbit/s)
TCP workload
UDP workload
Fig. 2: Scalability. Running experiments resulting in a 9.2 Gbit/s
network-wide goodput with TCP for 1 second takes ∼555 seconds. UDP
simulations are faster, with 13.8 Gbit/s goodput in ∼269 seconds.
3.2
Running packet-level simulations
The packet-level simulator can be used to run simulations of LEO
satellite networks for arbitrary satellite trajectories, GS locations,
routing, congestion control, and queuing. While the generated TLEs
for satellites, and routing and forwarding states are pre-computed
and fed to the simulator, it is responsible for simulating the mobility
of satellites and thereby accounting for varying link latencies over
time. For this purpose, we adapt an available ns-3 satellite mobility
model [61]. While this model adds a 1-3 km error per day to satellite
trajectories, this can be ignored safely for simulations that simulate
less than a few hours, as the networking implications of these
distances are minimal.
3.3
Post-processing and visualizations
Hypatia’s ns-3 module can simulate both UDP and TCP traffic
and log the relevant metrics for each transport, including RTTs,
congestion window, and application level flow progress over time.
We use gnuplot to generate all plots included in this paper, and
Cesium for visualizations. Cesium is a general-purpose 3D mapping
library for Javascript. We extend it to render the following interac-
tive visualizations, writing python code that takes the outputs of
our simulations and generates the visual elements for Cesium to
render.
• The satellite trajectories over time.
• The ground observer view over time, showing the satellites
visible in the sky at different angles of elevation.
• Changes in end-end paths over time.
• Changes in link utilization and available bandwidth on an end-
end path over time.
3.4
Simulator scalability
We briefly assess the scale at which Hypatia can run simulations in
reasonable time. We use Kuiper’s K1 shell as the LEO network, and
the 100 most populous cities as the GSes. The traffic is a random
permutation between the GSes. We test both TCP and UDP traffic.
For TCP, each GS-pair sends each other a long running TCP flow,
and we calculate network-wide goodput as the total rate of all
acknowledged data, counting only packet payloads and excluding
headers. For UDP, each GS-pair sends each other constant-rate,

IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Kassing and Bhattacherjee et al.
(a) Rio de Janeiro to St. Petersburg
(b) Manila to Dalian
(c) Istanbul to Nairobi
Fig. 3: RTT fluctuations. RTTs calculated by networkx and measured in our simulator using pings match closely, with the lines almost
entirely overlapping, as shown for 3 paths. The TCP per-packet RTTs are also shown, measured in the absence of any other traffic except the
source-destination pair. The queue size is 100 packets, i.e., approximately 1 BDP for 10 Mbps and 100 ms. Note: The last few pings’ RTT is shown
as 0 due to them not yet returning back in time to give a valid RTT measurement.
paced UDP traffic at the line rate, and goodput is calculated as the
total rate of network-wide payload arrivals. For both types of traffic,
to control the traffic rate of the simulation, we vary the line rate
of each network link, all assumed to be uniform; we test line rates
of 1, 10, 25, 100 and 250 Mbit/s, and 1 and 10 Gbit/s. We run the
simulations on a single core on a 2.26 Ghz Intel Xeon L5520.
We quantify ‘slowdown’: if Hypatia takes 𝑏real seconds to
simulate 𝑎virtual seconds, slowdown is 𝑏
𝑎. The results, shown in
Fig. 2, allow an experimenter to directly answer the question: if
I want to run the system at 𝐶Gbit/s goodput and obtain data for
𝑎virtual seconds, how long will it take? If slowdown for 𝑥-axis
= 𝐶is 𝑦, then the answer is 𝑦· 𝑎seconds. The results show that,
e.g., to simulate ∼10 Gbps network goodput for 10 virtual seconds,
Hypatia would need ∼33 minutes for UDP traffic and ∼100 minutes
for TCP. The goodput alone determines the slowdown 𝑏
𝑎, implying
a simple trade-off: given a fixed real time budget, 𝑏, one can either
simulate at high goodput for a short virtual time, or simulate at
lower goodput for a longer virtual time. For the same experiment
setup in terms of a constellation and traffic matrix, setting the
line-rate of links allows control over goodput (up to a point; as
utilization increases, goodput plateaus even with increasing load).
The simulation is bottlenecked at per-packet event processing.
As satellite network paths often comprise a large number of hops,
each end-end packet delivery results in many more events than,
e.g., for a data center network simulation. The satellite network’s
scale is also not a significant factor, at least for tens of thousands
of satellites; the simulation setup costs, which increase with net-
work scale, are only incurred at the start, while the packet events
dominate the real time incurred for simulation.
We find that opportunities for speeding simulations up may be
limited. Beyond ns-3’s per-packet processing time, Hypatia only
adds a minor overhead for calculating the per-packet delay through
the mobility model. Forwarding tables are pre-computed, and MAC
tables are pre-filled to prevent ARP activity. We are exploring to
what extent ns-3’s distributed mode affords speedup, but for a
variety of use cases, Hypatia’s current simulation pace will suffice,
as our later analysis shows.
4
EXAMINING A FEW LEO PATHS
We first analyze connectivity between a few GS-pairs in depth to
give a view of how an end-end connection behaves.
4.1
RTT fluctuations
We examine how the end-end RTTs vary over time. These experi-
ments use the Kuiper K1 shell. We run the analysis for 200 seconds,
as for Kuiper-scale networks this is sufficient to show nearly the
full range of variations.
For each source-destination pair, 𝑠-𝑑, 𝑠sends 𝑑a ping every
1 ms, and logs the response time. We also compare the measured
RTTs to those generated using networkx computations for the same
end-points, and the same constellation. For these networkx computa-
tions, we use snapshots of the system every 100 ms, and compute the
shortest paths using the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. Analysis based
on such computations has already appeared in recent work [5, 29];
we use it both as a validation for some of our simulator’s satellite-
specific code, and to highlight and explain the subtle differences that
actual packets sometimes experience compared to paths computed
from a static snapshot.
Fig. 3 shows the results for three 𝑠-𝑑pairs. The ping measure-
ments from Hypatia (‘Pings’) and the snapshot computations from
networkx (‘Computed’) match closely for most of the time. For in-
stance, in Fig. 3(a) at 𝑡= 32.9 s the path changes, which causes the
RTT to rise from 96 ms to 111 ms. Occasionally, like in Fig. 3(c)
around 130 seconds, we see spikes in the ping RTT compared to
networkx. These spikes result from forwarding state changes across
the path: as a packet travels on what was the shortest path when it
departed the source, the packet arrives at some satellite no longer
on the new shortest path, as satellites have moved. This results
effectively in the packet having taken a detour compared to the
instant path computation in networkx.
The path from Rio de Janeiro to St. Petersburg sees a disruption
around 150 seconds into the simulation, shown as the shaded region
in all related plots. We found that for this period, St. Petersburg
does not have any visible Kuiper satellites at sufficiently high an-
gle of elevation, which, obviously, results in the satellite network
path being disconnected. For Kuiper, its other two shells do not
address this missing connectivity either; high-latitude cities like St.
Petersburg will not see continuous connectivity over Kuiper.
For the other two paths, there are smaller but still substantial
variations in the RTT over time. Across time, the Manila-Dalian
path has a minimum RTT of 25 ms and a maximum RTT of 48 ms,
thus changing by nearly 2×. For the Istanbul-Nairobi path, this RTT
range is 47-70 ms.

Exploring the “Internet from space” with Hypatia
IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
(a) Rio de Janeiro to St. Petersburg
(b) Manila to Dalian
(c) Istanbul to Nairobi
Fig. 4: TCP congestion window evolution. As expected, the congestion window typically fluctuates between the BDP and BDP plus queue size
(100 packets). However, in certain cases, when the RTT gets lower, reordering happens, and even though there is no loss, the congestion window is
still halved.
(a) NewReno causes high RTTs.
(b) Vegas decreases CWND on RTT increase.
(c) Vegas’ throughput collapses.
Fig. 5: Both loss- and delay-based CC suffer. As seen here for the connection from Rio de Janeiro to St. Petersburg, while loss-based congestion
control (NewReno) fills up queues, delay-based congestion control (Vegas) infers increasing delay as congestion and collapses in throughput. This
happens at 35 s, and from then on, throughput stays low for Vegas.
For real-time applications that care about jitter, these variations
could necessitate a somewhat large “jitter buffer” to store and de-
liver packets to the application at an even rate. The determining
latency in such cases will be the maximum latency of an end-end
connection over time.
Takeaway for applications: The maximum end-end RTT over
time can be much higher than the minimum, and will determine
the latency for jitter-sensitive applications.
4.2
Congestion control, absent congestion
We also explore how congestion control works on changing satellite
paths. For this, we first use a congestion-free setting: the measured
end-end connection is the only one sending traffic, with the rest of
the network being entirely empty.
Fig. 3 also includes the per-packet RTT observed by TCP (NewReno)
packets. This TCP observed RTT is calculated as the time difference
between sending a packet and receiving its ACK. As expected, TCP
continually fills and drains the buffer, thus increasing the RTT. To
make the simulations faster, the shown experiments use a 10 Mbps
line-rate. The buffers are sized to 100 packets, i.e., 1 bandwidth-
delay product (BDP) for 100 ms. With higher rate, we expect the
same trend, with a smaller increase in RTTs as queues drain faster.
Fig. 4 shows the TCP congestion window evolution for the same
3 connections over the same period. The instantaneous BDP, ag-
gregated with queue capacity, i.e., BDP+Q, is also shown at each
point in time – this is the maximum number of packets that can
be in-flight without drops (assuming there is one bottleneck). The
network device queue size, 𝑄, for both ISLs and GSLs is set to 100
packets. For the times when BDP+Q is stable, TCP, as expected,
repeatedly hits it, incurs a drop, cuts the rate, and ramps up again.
But the changes in RTT, and thus BDP+Q, result in TCP changing
its behavior. The disconnection event for St. Petersburg is evident
from Fig. 4(a), but additionally, we can see drops in the congestion
window for the other connections too, e.g., in Fig. 4(c), around 140 s,
TCP drops the congestion window because of packet reordering. At
this time, as the path is shortened by ∼16 ms, packets transmitted
later use the new shorter path, and arrive first at the destination.
The resulting duplicate ACKs are interpreted as loss by the sender.
The TCP RTT oscillations at the right end of Fig. 3(a) and 5(a) are
caused by delayed acknowledgements. We checked that disabling
delayed ACKs eliminates these, but does not change the rest of the
observed behavior, which is our focus.
TCP’s filling up of buffers and the resulting deterioration in
per-packet latency is a widely recognized problem [3, 11, 27]. For
LEO networks that promise low-latency operation, this is perhaps
even more undesirable. We thus also test delay-based transport
by repeating the same experiments, except using TCP Vegas. Note
that the algorithms are not competing with each other, rather, each
transport is tested entirely separately, i.e., without any competing
traffic – the issue of Vegas not being aggressive enough against
Reno or Cubic is entirely orthogonal and immaterial here. Any
transport implementable in ns-3 can be evaluated in Hypatia.
Fig. 5 shows the behavior of both NewReno and Vegas for one
of the paths, Rio de Janeiro to St. Petersburg, Across the 200 s
simulations, the per-packet RTT is shown in Fig. 5(a), the congestion

IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Kassing and Bhattacherjee et al.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
ECDF (pairs)
Max. RTT / Geodesic RTT (x)
Telesat T1
Kuiper K1
Starlink S1
Fig. 6: RTT vs. geodesic. Even the maximum RTT (over time) over
LEO networks is close to the geodesic RTT for most connections, espe-
cially for Telesat and Kuiper. However, some connections see several
times higher maximum RTTs.
window in Fig. 5(b), and the achieved throughput averaged over
100 ms intervals in Fig. 5(c). Vegas, as expected, often operates with
a near-empty buffer, e.g., until around 140 s, it matches the ping RTT
measurements in Fig. 3(a) closely. Unfortunately, however, Vegas
interprets the increase in latency at ∼33 s as a sign of congestion,
drastically cuts its congestion window (Fig. 5(b)), and achieves very
poor throughput (Fig. 5(c)) after this point.
We tested NewReno and Vegas primarily because they are two
well-known algorithms using loss- and delay-based congestion de-
tection, and are already implemented in ns-3. However, Hypatia
can be used with any congestion control algorithm implemented
in ns-3. For instance, once a mature implementation of BBR [11]
is available, evaluating its behavior on LEO networks would be of
high interest. As of this writing, while there are some BBR imple-
mentations available online [17, 39], these have not been merged
into ns-3, and we did not invest effort in testing these.
Our above results highlight challenges for congestion control in
LEO networks: both loss and delay are poor signals of congestion
in this setting. Loss, besides suffering from its well-known problem
of only arising after buffers are full and latencies are inflated, is
additionally vulnerable to being inferred incorrectly due to reorder-
ing. On the other hand, delay is also an unreliable signal because
delay fluctuations occur even without queueing. This makes con-
gestion control in this setting a difficult problem. Of course, if the
sender knows the satellite path’s variations, they can “subtract”
them out and adapt. However, in general, the end-points need not
even be aware that they are using a satellite-path: an end-point that
is directly connected to a fixed connection could have its traffic
sent to the nearest ground station by its ISP, as suggested in recent
work [26]. Solutions like splitting the transport connection are also
becoming difficult to support with transport such as QUIC, that
does not support man-in-the-middle behavior.
Takeaway for congestion control: Both loss and delay can be
poor signals for congestion control in LEO networks.
5
A CONSTELLATION-WIDE VIEW
We use the first planned deployments for Starlink and Kuiper, and
the first shell for Telesat to examine constellation-scale behavior.
Starlink and Kuiper plan to deploy their shells S1 and K1 in Table 1
first. Telesat’s deployment plan is more complex [72]; we simply
use its first shell, T1. We use the world’s 100 most populous cities
as GSes, and examine connections between all pairs of GSes.
5.1
RTTs and variations therein
We measure the minimum and maximum RTT for each connection
over the simulation duration. We also compute the “geodesic RTT”
i.e., the time it would take to travel back and forth between a con-
nection’s end-points at the speed of light in vacuum, 𝑐. This is thus
the minimum achievable RTT.
For each connection, we compute the ratio of its maximum RTT
over time to the geodesic RTT between its end-points. Fig. 6 shows
this ratio as a CDF across connections. For all three constellations,
more than 80% of connections see a maximum RTT less than 2× the
geodesic. Given that terrestrial fiber paths are often longwinded,
and the speed of light in fiber is roughly 2𝑐/3 [9], this implies that
for most connections in our simulation, LEO networks will have
substantially lower latencies than today’s Internet. The long tail of
latency inflation compared to the geodesic arises from connections
between relatively nearby end-points, for which the overheads
of the up-down connectivity to satellites are significant. For this
reason, we already exclude end-point pairs that are within 500 km
of each other from this plot and other results in this section.
Similar observations about latency in LEO networks have already
been made in other work [5, 6, 29, 44]. However, a new and sur-
prising finding here is about the comparison of the constellations.
Telesat has the fewest satellites, with less than a third of Kuiper’s
and less than a fourth of Starlink’s, and yet it achieves the lowest
latencies for most connections. Starlink’s latencies are also higher
than Kuiper’s.
The explanations for these results lie in the connectivity param-
eters and the orbital structure of the constellations. Telesat claims
that it will use a much lower minimum angle of elevation, 10°, com-
pared to Starlink (25°) and Kuiper (30°). This allows GSes to see
more of Telesat’s satellites at any time, providing more options for
end-end paths. Additionally, as these low elevation paths are closer
to the horizon, the overhead of the up-down link is often smaller.
The Starlink-Kuiper differences are not due to the angle of eleva-
tion, which is similar, but the orbital structure. Both constellations
use a minimum angle of elevation that is much higher than Tele-
sat’s. This means that typically, GSes can see fewer satellites. This
restricts the GS-satellite connectivity, and increases the impact of
satellite-satellite connectivity. Kuiper’s orbital design, with 34 or-
bits of 34 satellites each, is more uniform than Starlink’s, with 72
orbits of 22 satellites each. In particular, satellites within an orbit are
much farther apart in Starlink, and paths often require zig-zagging
through multiple orbits to reach the destination.
We also evaluate how much the RTT fluctuates over time across
different connections. Fig. 7 shows the distribution across con-
nections of: (a) the absolute value of the maximum RTT within a
connection; (b) the difference between the maximum and minimum
within a connection; and (c) the ratio between the maximum and
minimum within a connection. The results show that while Star-
link sees the largest latency changes (∼10 ms in the median), the
other constellations also feature significant latency variation at the
tail. Telesat’s variations are the smallest again because of its low

Exploring the “Internet from space” with Hypatia
IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
ECDF (pairs)
Max. RTT (ms)
Telesat T1
Kuiper K1
Starlink S1
(a) CDF across pairs: max. RTT over time.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 5
 10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50
ECDF (pairs)
Max. RTT - Min. RTT (ms)
Telesat T1
Kuiper K1
Starlink S1
(b) CDF across pairs: max RTT - min RTT.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1
 1.2  1.4  1.6  1.8
 2
 2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8
ECDF (pairs)
Max. RTT / Min. RTT (x)
Telesat T1
Kuiper K1
Starlink S1
(c) CDF across pairs: max RTT / min RTT.
Fig. 7: RTTs and variations therein. Starlink S1 has a smaller number of satellites per orbit (22) than Kuiper K1, and thus sees both higher
and more variable RTTs. Telesat sees lower and less variable RTTs despite fewer satellites because its extremely low minimum angle of elevation
allows more GS-satellite connectivity options.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
ECDF (pairs)
# of path changes
Telesat T1
Kuiper K1
Starlink S1
(a) Distribution of path changes.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
ECDF (pairs)
Max. hop count - Min. hop count (# hops)
Telesat T1
Kuiper K1
Starlink S1
(b) Distribution of path hop-count differences.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1
 1.2  1.4  1.6  1.8
 2
 2.2  2.4  2.6  2.8
ECDF (pairs)
Max. hop count / Min. hop count
Telesat T1
Kuiper K1
Starlink S1
(c) Distribution of max hop-count / min hop-count.
Fig. 8: Path structure changes. Telesat’s paths change less than Kuiper’s and Starlink’s.
inclination: the same satellites are reachable for longer, and result
in more continuous and smaller latency changes. For Starlink, for
more than 30% of connections, the maximum RTT is at least 20%
larger than the minimum RTT.
For two reasons, we caution readers against concluding that
‘Telesat is a better design’: (a) There are downsides to using a lower
minimum angle of elevation, as discussed in §2.1; and (b) We are
evaluating constellations strictly from their filings, and it is unclear
to us if some operators are more optimistic than others about the
plausible design parameters; it is worth remembering that the filings
are meant to secure radio spectrum for an operator by showing
the potential utility of its network. The larger point, as far as the
Hypatia framework is concerned, is that given the right input
parameters, we can compare different designs along metrics like
RTTs and RTT variability.
5.2
Path structure evolution
Besides RTTs, we also examine the structure of the underlying
paths. For each connection, we measure the number of times its path
changes over the simulation. If the forwarding state computed in
two successive time-steps shows any different satellites composing
the path, we count this as one path change. Across connections, we
compute the CDF of these path changes. For each connection, we
also calculate the maximum and minimum number of satellite hops
in the path across the simulation.
Fig. 8(a) shows that in the median, over the 200 s simulation,
Starlink and Kuiper connections see 4 path changes, while Telesat
connections see 2 changes. These results are in line with our expla-
nation of RTT variations: Telesat’s use of a lower minimum angle
of elevation allows remaining connected to a satellite for longer,
and reduces path changes. The tail of path changes is long as well:
for Kuiper and Starlink, 10% of connections see 7 or more path
changes.
Fig. 8(b) shows how these different paths differ in terms of their
hop count. For Telesat, paths do not typically change in terms of hop
count. This is explained by Telesat being sparser: there are simply
fewer options for end-end paths, and with farther-apart satellites,
one hop of change would already be substantial. For Starlink, with
its large number of satellites, there are many more options for paths,
and more than a third of connections see paths with at least 2 more
hops than the minimum number.
Fig. 8(c) shows the same hop-count data in terms of relative
change in hop-count. For Starlink, more than 10% of connections
see more than 50% change in hop-count.
Unlike today’s Internet, LEO network paths evolve rapidly, es-
pecially for the denser networks, with paths changing multiple
times per minute, and often by a substantial number and fraction
of hops. Routing within LEO networks thus features high churn.
Nevertheless, given the tens of seconds between typical changes,
we do not expect the setting up of desired routing state itself to be
a major bottleneck.
5.3
Granularity of time-step updates
Hypatia converts a continuous process of satellite movement and
the resulting path changes into a discrete one. While latencies
along paths are continuously updated, the forwarding state is only
recomputed at fixed time-steps. We thus test how this affects our
observations on path changes.

IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Kassing and Bhattacherjee et al.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1
 10
 100
 1000
ECDF (time steps)
# of path changes in a time step
50ms
100ms
1000ms
(a)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
100ms
1000ms
# of path
changes missed
Fraction of pairs
Time step
0
1
2
(b)
Fig. 9: Time granularity for forwarding state updates. (a) As expected, compared to 50 ms time-steps, 100 ms time-steps see roughly 2×
the path changes, while 1000 ms see roughly 20× path changes. (b) The 1000 ms time-step misses a substantial number of path changes for some
pairs, while for 100 ms, missed changes are negligible.
We compute the network’s forwarding state at different time-
steps of 50, 100, and 1000 ms. For each configuration, we calculate:
(a) how many path changes per second occur in a time-step; (b)
how many path changes are missed at coarser time-steps compared
to 50 ms.
We only include results for Kuiper K1, but the conclusions hold
broadly. Fig. 9(a) shows the distribution of the number of path
changes network-wide across time-steps. Ideally, the 100 ms time-
step would have 2× the number of changes compared to the 50 ms
one, and 1000 ms would have 20×. This is almost always the case
for 100 ms, but for 1000 ms a significant fraction of path changes
are simply missed because multiple changes happened entirely
within that interval. Fig. 9(b) shows the distribution of these missed
changes for both the 100 ms and 1000 ms time-steps compared to
the 50 ms one. The 100 ms time-step misses for a negligible fraction
(0.4%) of pairs one or more path changes, while 1000 ms misses for
6% of pairs one or more path changes.
Note that finer granularity of time-steps requires expensive
shortest-path computations for the entire large network. Based
on our results, 100 ms is a good compromise. Further, given that
path changes occur over tens of seconds, the 100 ms time-step can
only be inaccurate and not provide the actual shortest paths for at
most 1% of the time.
5.4
Bandwidth fluctuations
Beside the structure and latency of paths, and the response of indi-
vidual TCP connections, we would also like to understand the result
of interactions between traffic flows in such networks. Towards
this goal, we conduct a simple experiment, sending long running
TCP flows between pairs of GSes over their shortest paths.
We use the same LEO network as in §4, i.e., Kuiper’s K1 shell,
with each link in the network set to 10 Mbps capacity to allow
us to scale the experiment. Instead of just pings, we now send
long running TCP NewReno flows between these GS pairs, which
are still the same random permutation of the world’s 100 most
populous cities. From the random permutation matrix, we remove
the pairs which have the same source or destination satellite as Rio
de Janeiro or St. Petersburg at any point through the simulation; this
prevents the first and last hops from being the bottleneck, allowing
us to focus on the ISL network’s behavior. We do not put this forth
as a representative traffic matrix; rather, it is simply one way of
sending substantial traffic through the network, and as we show
next, reveals interesting network behavior. Hypatia can support
arbitrary input traffic matrices.
We find that despite the traffic matrix being fixed throughout
our 200 s experiment, and the routing policy consistently being
shortest path routing, the motion of satellites makes the path-level
behavior highly dynamic.
Monitoring link utilization at one link is not a particularly useful
way of demonstrating this in LEO networks — a particular ISL will
traverse the globe in ∼100 min, seeing conditions corresponding to
its location over time. We thus measure the “unused bandwidth” for
each GS-pair, i.e., how much unused capacity is there on the end-
end path for that GS-pair over time. This is simply the path’s link
capacity (10 Mbps in our running scenario) minus the utilization of
the most congested on-path link at any time. In a static network with
fixed routing, and a fixed set of long-running TCP flows, we should
expect this unused bandwidth to be small. This static-network TCP
behavior is shown as the the gray line in Fig. 10 for the topology
frozen at its 𝑡= 0 position.
However, we find that in an LEO network with cross-traffic, the
amount of unused bandwidth is larger than that in the static case.
Fig. 10 shows the unused bandwidth, measured at a 1 s granularity,
for the same connection we examined in §4, from Rio de Janeiro
to St. Petersburg. While there are short periods, such as around
20 s, where the full capacity of the path is used (together, by this
connection and other cross-traffic), for a lot of the time, there is
substantial unused capacity: 31% of the time, more than a third of
the capacity is unused (excluding the unreachable period between
155-165 s), compared to 11% of the time if the satellite network were
kept static at its 𝑡= 0 state.
The reason for this difference is the shifts in cross traffic resulting
from the path changes: links constituting a GS-pair’s shortest path
change over time, and for each link, the set of GS-pairs it is used for
changes as well. This implies that the traffic mix at any link is highly
dynamic, making it difficult for transport to adapt – the goal of TCP-
like transport is, after all, to fairly share bandwidth across the flows

Exploring the “Internet from space” with Hypatia
IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 0
 40
 80
 120
 160
 200
Unused bandwidth (Mb/s)
Time (s)
Fig. 10: Unused bandwidth. For the same connection from Rio de
Janeiro to St. Petersburg as in Fig. 5(c), when tested with cross-traffic,
transport is often unable to use the available bandwidth. This is with
a fixed set of long-running TCP flows, and a fixed routing policy. The
gray line is if the satellite network is frozen at 𝑡= 0, effectively being
a static network.
traversing a bottleneck. In LEO networks the bottlenecks and which
flows constitute the traffic mix change substantially over time. Note
that this finding is not at odds with the results on infrequent path
structure changes in Fig. 8. Although the median GS-pair’s path
changes only a few times over our 200-second simulation period,
each end-end path has many links, and some of these links carry
traffic from many GS-pairs. This results in a cumulative effect of
changes in the cross-traffic traversing (the relatively stable) links
of an individual GS-pair’s path.
These observations have consequences for both traffic engineer-
ing and transport. Routing and traffic engineering could be planned
ahead, such that knowing the upcoming changes in paths, traffic
can be shifted a priori from links that will become new bottlenecks.
This is a network-layer operation within the LEO network, and
thus in the operator’s control. A likely more difficult remedy is to
attempt to make transport more responsive in adapting to changes:
it is not clear that this can be done without causing more instability,
as aggressive transport ramps up and down faster.
Takeaway for routing / TE: LEO networks present uncharted
territory for routing and TE, and their interactions with transport.
Traffic could potentially be moved away from links that will other-
wise soon become bottlenecks due to changes in the set of end-end
paths they serve.
6
VISUALIZING LEO NETWORKS
Since LEO networks are new to us, and likely to most of the network-
ing research community, we found it extremely useful to visualize
some aspects of them, and thus build our intuitions on their ex-
pected behavior. We discuss some of the visualizations Hypatia
provides. While these are best appreciated online in video and in-
teractive Javascript [7], we include here snapshots discussing their
utility.
Satellite trajectories: It is difficult to grasp the role of different
satellite trajectory parameters (§2.1) without being able to visually
see their outcomes. Visualizing the trajectories of satellites in a con-
stellation also drives intuition about how satellites travel together,
the differences between the multiple shells of some constellations,
the density of satellites over equatorial and polar regions, etc.
Fig. 11 shows snapshots of the first shells of Starlink, Kuiper, and
Telesat — S1, K1, and T1 in Table 1. A live 3D version of this figure
is available online [7]; it is interactive and allows one to change
the camera perspective in order to better see the spatial variations.
Telesat covers the polar regions by virtue of the higher inclination
of its orbits (98.98°), while Kuiper and Starlink provide denser cov-
erage at lower latitudes. Given that a vast majority of the global
population resides at lower latitudes [19], lower inclination allows
satellites to spend more time over densely populated areas. These
design differences may imply differences in the target markets of
the constellation operators.
Besides coverage, inclination also has other implications for
connectivity: Telesat’s almost north-south orbits may offer more
direct paths for routes like between Europe and Africa, while the
other constellations will do so for east-west routes like between
North America and Europe.
We include satellite trajectory visualizations primarily for com-
pleteness: there are a variety of other beautiful visualizations of
similar nature online [6, 12, 22, 30, 32]. To the best of our knowl-
edge, no open-source visualization tools are available that focus
on network behavior of LEO constellations, aspects of which we
describe next.
Ground station view: For any given constellation, and a specified
location, Hypatia can show how that constellation appears in the
sky to a ground station. This view helps understand the role of the
minimum angle of elevation, as well as the inclination of orbits. The
visualizations show that close to the horizon, there are many more
satellites, but the satellites a GS can communicate with, i.e., above
the minimum angle of elevation, are much more limited. From high
latitude cities, one can see the limits of low-inclination orbits: few
satellites in such orbits are visible, with this visibility often being
intermittent. The online version of this visualization [7] provides
video of the ground observer’s perspective.
Fig. 12 shows two snapshots of Kuiper’s K1 seen from St. Peters-
burg. The azimuth along the 𝑥-axis is the panoramic view of the sky
(0° is due North, 90° is due East). The 𝑦-axis is the angle of elevation,
0° for the horizon, and 90° for directly overhead. Satellites in the
shaded region are above the horizon, but still at an angle of eleva-
tion lower than the minimum needed for connectivity. Over certain
periods, a GS at this location can connect to Kuiper, as in Fig. 12(a),
while at other times, it looses connectivity, as in Fig. 12(b). This
explains the results for Rio de Janeiro to St. Petersburg between
155-165 s in Fig. 3(a), Fig. 4(a), and Fig. 5.
End-end paths: In §4.1, we discuss RTT variations due to the
LEO dynamism. To better understand these, it is useful to visualize
the end-end paths at different points in time. Fig. 13 shows an
example path on Starlink, Paris-Luanda, which experiences one
of the highest RTT variations. The longest (117 ms) and shortest
(85 ms) RTT paths during our 200 s simulation are shown. It is
typical of such north-south paths to pick an orbit and stick to it as
long as possible in order to reduce latency. But in the former case,
exiting this orbit (at the north end of the illustrations) towards the
destination takes 9 zig-zag hops, while in the latter case only 6 are
needed.

IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Kassing and Bhattacherjee et al.
(a) Telesat T1
(b) Kuiper K1
(c) Starlink S1
Fig. 11: Constellation trajectories. (a) Telesat T1 — 27 × 13, 1,015 km, 98.98° (b) Kuiper K1 — 34 × 34, 630 km, 51.9° (c) Starlink S1 — 72 × 22,
550 km, 53°. Satellites are black dots, while orbits are marked in red.
(a) Connectivity is possible at this time.
(b) No satellites are reachable.
Fig. 12: Ground observer’s view. The x-axis is the horizon, with 0° = 𝑁, 90° = 𝐸, while the y-axis is the angle of elevation in the sky. The
shaded region includes satellites above the horizon, but have angle of elevation lower than the minimum required to connect. From St. Petersburg,
Kuiper’s K1 is intermittently reachable.
Link utilization: In §5.4, we discuss how even for a static traffic
matrix, LEO dynamics cause links and paths to vary in utilization
over time. This is shown for one example path in Fig. 14, for the
same experiment across Kuiper described in §5.4. The thicker /
warmer-colored ISLs are more congested.
We can also visualize network-wide bottlenecks as shown in
Fig. 15. For the particular traffic matrix we use, the ISLs over the
Atlantic, connecting the US to Europe and parts of Asia, are highly
congested. This indicates that there will be substantial value in
using non-shortest path and multi-path routing across such busy
regions.
7
LIMITATIONS & FUTURE WORK
Hypatia is only the first step in building up research infrastructure
for a new breed of networks. It has several under-developed pieces,
including some where the sparsity of publicly available information
was limiting for us.
• The most under-developed aspect is the radio GS-satellite seg-
ment design. It would help to frame more realistic models of
the interfaces at both satellites and GSes, and for antenna gain
and interference.
• The current model of ISLs is also somewhat simplistic, and it
would be useful to model the impact of the Doppler effect on
the bandwidth and reliability of ISLs.
• Incorporating a weather model would enable work on reliabil-
ity and rerouting around bad weather.
• Work on multi-path routing and congestion control will also
require some modifications to Hypatia.
• GEO-LEO connectivity, albeit not implemented already, should
be straightforward to implement if GEO coverage and mini-
mum elevation constraints are known.
• Simulating constellations with heterogeneous satellite and ISL
capabilities could be interesting as well — as satellites are grad-
ually deployed, their capabilities may advance over time. Het-
erogeneity in terms of link capacities is easy to accommodate,
but changes to support different numbers of ISLs across satel-
lites will require additional work in defining topologies that
appropriately use such heterogeneity.
More broadly, as is typical for simulation infrastructure, we cannot
fully anticipate the needs of novel proposals for LEO networking,
and it is likely that many such efforts will require modifications of

Exploring the “Internet from space” with Hypatia
IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Fig. 13: Shortest path changes over time. On Starlink’s S1, the
Paris-Luanda RTT varies between 117 ms (left) and 85 ms. The zig-
zags stem from the nature of ISLs in the topology — satellites which
seem visually close to each other are not necessarily connected directly.
Fig. 14: Congestion shifts over time. An example path, Chicago-
Zhengzhou, shows how the link utilizations change over time, even
with the input traffic being static. The top and bottom views are at
10 s and 150 s respectively.
Hypatia. However, we believe it provides a useful starting point
for such work.
Importantly, all the takeaways we have highlighted throughout
the paper are robust to Hypatia’s current limitations. Regardless
of how the missing design details are filled in as more information
becomes available, the RTTs are going to vary, congestion control
is going to see noisy loss and delay signals, and the shifting paths
pose clear challenges for routing and traffic engineering.
8
CONCLUSION
We present Hypatia, a framework for simulating and visualizing
large LEO networks. We demonstrate Hypatia’s utility in under-
standing the behavior of such networks, especially the temporal
Fig. 15: Constellation-wide utilization. On Kuiper, the trans-
atlantic paths are highly congested for our tested traffic matrix. The
red / thick ISLs are heavily utilized, while green / thin ISLs have
minimal traffic. ISLs with no traffic are excluded.
variations in the structure of paths and their latencies. We draw out
some of the implications of this LEO network dynamism for con-
gestion control, and routing and traffic engineering. Our work not
only adds quantitative support to recent position papers drawing
out the challenges of LEO networking, but also provides a sorely
missing infrastructure for making progress on these challenges.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to our shepherd Eric Wustrow and the anonymous
reviewers for their helpful feedback.

IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Kassing and Bhattacherjee et al.
REFERENCES
[1] Janet Abbate. 2004. Robert (“Bob”) Elliot Kahn. https://amturing.acm.org/award_
winners/kahn_4598637.cfm.
[2] Riza Akturan and Wolfhard J Vogel. 1997. Path diversity for LEO satellite-PCS in
the urban environment. In IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation.
[3] Venkat Arun and Hari Balakrishnan. 2018. Copa: Practical Delay-Based Conges-
tion Control for the Internet. In USENIX NSDI.
[4] Jason H Bau. 2002. Topologies for satellite constellations in a cross-linked space
backbone network. Ph.D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[5] Debopam Bhattacherjee, Waqar Aqeel, Ilker Nadi Bozkurt, Anthony Aguirre,
Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran, P Godfrey, Gregory Laughlin, Bruce Maggs, and
Ankit Singla. 2018. Gearing up for the 21st century space race. In ACM HotNets.
[6] Debopam Bhattacherjee and Ankit Singla. 2019. Network topology design at
27,000 km/hour. In ACM CoNEXT.
[7] Bhattacherjee, Debopam and Singla, Ankit. 2020. LEO satellite networks. https:
//leosatsim.github.io/.
[8] Alan Boyle. 2019. Amazon to offer broadband access from orbit with 3,236-
satellite ‘Project Kuiper’ constellation. https://www.geekwire.com/2019/amazon-
project-kuiper-broadband-satellite/.
[9] Ilker Nadi Bozkurt, Anthony Aguirre, Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran, P Brighten
Godfrey, Gregory Laughlin, Bruce Maggs, and Ankit Singla. 2017. Why is the
Internet so slow?!. In International Conference on Passive and Active Network
Measurement. Springer.
[10] David Canellis. 2020.
Bezos and Musk’s internet-from-space race is back
on.
https://thenextweb.com/hardfork/2020/03/30/oneweb-collapse-internet-
space-race-leo-satellite-bezos-musk-back-on/.
[11] Neal Cardwell, Yuchung Cheng, C Stephen Gunn, Soheil Hassas Yeganeh, and Van
Jacobson. 2017. BBR: congestion-based congestion control. In Communications
of the ACM.
[12] Celestrak. 2020.
Orbit Visualization (e-tool per StarLink).
https:
//celestrak.com/cesium/orbit-viz.php?tle=/NORAD/elements/supplemental/
starlink.txt&satcat=/pub/satcat.txt&orbits=0&pixelSize=3&samplesPerPeriod=
90&referenceFrame=1.
[13] CesiumJS. 2020. https://cesium.com/cesiumjs/.
[14] Vincent WS Chan. 1999. Optical space communications: a key building block for
wide area space networks. In IEEE LEOS Annual Meeting Conference Proceedings.
[15] Vincent WS Chan. 2000. Optical space communications. In IEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics.
[16] Stephen Clark. 2020. SpaceX’s Starlink network surpasses 400-satellite mark
after successful launch. https://spaceflightnow.com/2020/04/22/spacexs-starlink-
network-surpasses-400-satellite-mark-after-successful-launch/.
[17] Mark Claypool, Jae Won Chung, and Feng Li. 2018. BBR’ an implementation
of bottleneck bandwidth and round-trip time congestion control for ns-3. In
Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on ns-3. ACM.
[18] Gary Comparetto and Neal Hulkower. 1994.
Global mobile satellite
communications-A review of three contenders. In 15th International Communica-
tions Satellite Systems Conference and Exhibit. AIAA.
[19] Datagraver. 2020. WORLD POPULATION DISTRIBUTION BY LATITUDE AND
LONGITUDE - 2020. https://datagraver.com/case/world-population-distribution-
by-latitude-and-longitude-2020.
[20] Olivier L De Weck, Richard De Neufville, and Mathieu Chaize. 2004. Staged
deployment of communications satellite constellations in low earth orbit. In
Journal of Aerospace Computing, Information, and Communication.
[21] Inigo del Portillo, Bruce G Cameron, and Edward F Crawley. 2019. A technical
comparison of three low earth orbit satellite constellation systems to provide
global broadband. In Acta Astronautica. Elsevier.
[22] Elias Eccli. 2020. Starlink Constellation (2019/11/17 - 2020/05/21). https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=857UM4ErX9A.
[23] Sandra Erwin. 2019. SpaceX plans to start offering Starlink broadband services in
2020. https://spacenews.com/spacex-plans-to-start-offering-starlink-broadband-
services-in-2020/.
[24] John V Evans. 1998. Satellite systems for personal communications. In Proceedings
of the IEEE.
[25] GeoRepository. 2020. WGS72. https://georepository.com/crs_4985/WGS-72.html.
[26] Giacomo Giuliari, Tobias Klenze, Markus Legner, David Basin, Adrian Perrig,
and Ankit Singla. 2020. Internet Backbones in Space. In ACM SIGCOMM CCR.
[27] Prateesh Goyal, Akshay Narayan, Frank Cangialosi, Deepti Raghavan, Srini-
vas Narayana, Mohammad Alizadeh, and Hari Balakrishnan. 2018. Elasticity
Detection: A Building Block for Delay-Sensitive Congestion Control. In ACM
ANRW.
[28] Loren Grush. 2020. SpaceX may spin out internet-from-space business and
make it public. https://www.theverge.com/2020/2/6/21126540/spacex-starlink-
internet-space-mega-constellation-ipo-spinoff-gwynne-shotwell.
[29] Mark Handley. 2018. Delay is Not an Option: Low Latency Routing in Space. In
ACM HotNets.
[30] Mark Handley. 2018. Starlink revisions, Nov 2018. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=QEIUdMiColU.
[31] Mark Handley. 2019. Using Ground Relays for Low-Latency Wide-Area Routing
in Megaconstellations. In ACM HotNets.
[32] Mark Handley. 2019. Using ground relays with Starlink. https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=m05abdGSOxY.
[33] Thomas Henderson and Randy Katz. 2000. Network simulation for LEO satellite
networks. In 18th International Communications Satellite Systems Conference and
Exhibit. AIAA.
[34] Mark Holmes. 2020. In the Eye of the Storm: Greg Wyler Breaks Cover to Talk
OneWeb. http://interactive.satellitetoday.com/via/oneweb-special-edition/in-
the-eye-of-the-storm-greg-wyler-breaks-cover-to-talk-oneweb/.
[35] HughesNet. 2020. https://www.hughesnet.com/.
[36] Iridium Communications Inc. 2020. Iridium NEXT. https://web.archive.org/web/
20200718205415/https://www.iridiumnext.com/.
[37] Iridium Communications Inc. 2020. Iridium Satellite Communications. https:
//www.iridium.com/.
[38] ISS National Lab. 2015. ISSRDC 2015 - A Conversation with Elon Musk. https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZmEg95wPiVU.
[39] Vivek Jain, Viyom Mittal, and Mohit P Tahiliani. 2018. Design and implementation
of TCP BBR in ns-3. In Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on ns-3. ACM.
[40] Simon Kassing, Debopam Bhattacherjee, André Baptista Águas, Jens Eirik Saethre,
and Ankit Singla. 2020. Hypatia source code. https://github.com/snkas/hypatia.
[41] Amiko Kauderer and Kim Dismukes. 2011. NASA HSF: Definition of Two-line
Element Set Coordinate System. https://spaceflight.nasa.gov/realdata/sightings/
SSapplications/Post/JavaSSOP/SSOP_Help/tle_def.html.
[42] T.S. Kelso. 2020. CelesTrak: Current NORAD Two-Line Element Sets. https:
//www.celestrak.com/NORAD/elements/.
[43] John D Kiesling. 1990. Land mobile satellite systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE.
[44] Tobias Klenze, Giacomo Giuliari, Christos Pappas, Adrian Perrig, and David Basin.
2018. Networking in Heaven as on Earth. In ACM HotNets.
[45] Mark Krebs. 2016. Satellite Constellation. https://patents.google.com/patent/
US20170005719A1/en.
[46] Kuiper Systems LLC. 2019. Application of Kuiper Systems LLC for Authority
to Launch and Operate a Non-Geostationary Satellite Orbit System in Ka-band
Frequencies. https://licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment_key=
1773885.
[47] Kuiper USASAT-NGSO-8A ITU filing. 2018. https://www.itu.int/ITU-R/space/
asreceived/Publication/DisplayPublication/8716.
[48] Kuiper USASAT-NGSO-8B ITU filing. 2018. https://www.itu.int/ITU-R/space/
asreceived/Publication/DisplayPublication/8774.
[49] Kuiper USASAT-NGSO-8C ITU filing. 2018. https://www.itu.int/ITU-R/space/
asreceived/Publication/DisplayPublication/8718.
[50] Kenneth Chun Hei Kwok. 2001. Cost optimization and routing for satellite network
constellations. Ph.D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[51] LeoSat. 2018. Technical Overview. http://leosat.com/media/1114/leosat-technical-
overview.pdf.
[52] Jiulong Ma, Xiaogang Qi, and Lifang Liu. 2017. An Effective Topology Design
Based on LEO/GEO Satellite Networks. In International Conference on Space
Information Network. Springer.
[53] Gérard Maral. 1994. The ways to personal communications via satellite. In
International journal of satellite communications. Wiley Online Library.
[54] marine.rutgers.edu. 2001. Keplerian Elements. https://marine.rutgers.edu/cool/
education/class/paul/orbits.html.
[55] Florian Meyer. 2019.
A new network design for the “Internet from
space".
https://ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2019/12/a-new-
network-design-for-the-internet-from-space.html.
[56] NASA. 2008. Orbits and Kepler’s Laws. https://solarsystem.nasa.gov/resources/
310/orbits-and-keplers-laws/.
[57] NASA. 2020. General Mission Analysis Tool. https://software.nasa.gov/software/
GSC-17177-1.
[58] NetworkX developers. 2020. NetworkX. https://networkx.github.io/.
[59] North American Aerospace Defense Command. 2020. https://www.norad.mil/.
[60] ns-3 Network Simulator. 2020. https://www.nsnam.org/.
[61] Pedro Silva. 2016. ns3-satellite. https://gitlab.inesctec.pt/pmms/ns3-satellite.
[62] Saheli Roy Choudhury. 2019. Super-fast internet from satellites is the next big
thing in the space race. https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/22/fast-internet-via-
satellites-is-the-next-big-thing-in-the-space-race.html.
[63] Afreen Siddiqi, Jason Mellein, and Olivier de Weck. 2005. Optimal reconfig-
urations for increasing capacity of communication satellite constellations. In
46th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials
Conference.
[64] Kawsu Sidibeh. 2008. Adaption of the IEEE 802.11 protocol for inter-satellite links in
LEO satellite networks. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Surrey (United Kingdom).
[65] SNS3. 2020. https://www.sns3.org/content/home.php.
[66] SpaceX. 2016. SPACEX NON-GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE SYSTEM. https:
//fcc.report/IBFS/SAT-LOA-20161115-00118/1158350.pdf.
[67] SpaceX. 2019. SPACEX NON-GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE SYSTEM. https:
//fcc.report/IBFS/SAT-MOD-20190830-00087/1877671.

Exploring the “Internet from space” with Hypatia
IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
[68] SpaceX FCC filing. 2017. SpaceX V-BAND NON-GEOSTATIONARY SATEL-
LITE SYSTEM. https://licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment_key=
1190019.
[69] SpaceX FCC update. 2018. SPACEX NON-GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE SYS-
TEM. https://licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment_key=1569860.
[70] SpaceX Starlink. 2017. https://www.spacex.com/webcast.
[71] David E Sterling and John E Hatlelid. 1991. The IRIDIUM system-a revolution-
ary satellite communications system developed with innovative applications of
technology. In MILCOM 91-Conference record. IEEE.
[72] Telesat. 2018. Telesat’s responses - Federal Communications Commission. http:
//licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment_key=1205775.
[73] Telesat. 2020. APPLICATION FOR MODIFICATION OF MARKET ACCESS AU-
THORIZATION. https://fcc.report/IBFS/SAT-MPL-20200526-00053/2378318.pdf.
[74] Telesat. 2020. Telesat: Global Satellite Operators. https://www.telesat.com/.
[75] Liam Tung. 2020. SpaceX’s public beta of internet from space service coming
by fall 2020. https://www.zdnet.com/article/elon-musk-spacexs-public-beta-of-
internet-from-space-service-coming-by-fall-2020/.
[76] Viasat. 2020. https://www.viasat.com/.
[77] Tanya Vladimirova and Kawsu Sidibeh. 2007. Inter-Satellite Links in LEO Con-
stellations of Small Satellites. http://www.ee.surrey.ac.uk/m_ssc/research/vlsi/
intersatellite.html.
[78] Markus Werner, Axel Jahn, Erich Lutz, and Axel Bottcher. 1995. Analysis of system
parameters for LEO/ICO-satellite communication networks. In IEEE Journal on
Selected areas in Communications.
[79] ROBERT WIEDEMAN, ALLEN SALMASI, and Dennis Rouffet. 1992. Globalstar-
Mobile communications where ever you are. In 14th International Communication
Satellite Systems Conference and Exhibit. AIAA.
[80] Lloyd Wood. 2001. Internetworking with satellite constellations. Ph.D. Dissertation.
University of Surrey.
[81] Lloyd Wood. 2017.
Satellite constellation visualization (SaVi).
https://savi.
sourceforge.io/.
[82] William W Wu, Edward F Miller, Wilbur L Pritchard, and Raymond L Pickholtz.
1994. Mobile satellite communications. In Proceedings of the IEEE.
A
GROUND STATION RELAYS
Hypatia easily accommodates experimentation with constellations
that eschew inter-satellite connectivity. In this scenario, ground
station relays provide “bent pipe” connectivity with long-distance
communication going up and down through satellites and GSes [31].
To demonstrate this capability of Hypatia, we simulate a long-
lived TCP flow from Paris to Moscow over the first shell of Kuiper’s
K1 shell (Table 1). We compare the behavior of the flow in two
scenarios: (a) the constellation model used in the rest of the paper,
i.e., with one GS-satellite link followed by a series of ISLs, followed
by a satellite-GS link; and (b) without any ISLs, using only bent-pipe
connectivity through GS relays. For the latter case, we add a grid
of ground stations between Paris and Moscow such that there are
multiple relays that can be chosen from.
Fig. 16(a) and Fig. 16(b) show the situation at the start (𝑡= 0)
for the two scenarios. Fig. 18(c) compares the path RTT over time
for the two scenarios absent any traffic. As expected, the bent-pipe
connectivity results in higher latency, typically by around 5 ms.
Fig. 17 shows the paths at a different time (around 𝑡= 159 s), near
the “peak RTT” in Fig. 18(c).
While a variety of configurations are possible for network de-
vices, for this experiment, we configured the network devices at
the satellites to have a fixed total up-bandwidth, and to use the
same queue for all outgoing traffic. This implies that for the bent-
pipe connection, an on-path satellite’s GSL uplink queue is shared
by the TCP packets traveling in one direction (from a GS to the
satellite) and the corresponding ACKs traveling in the opposite di-
rection (from a different GS to the satellite). Our experiment shows
the impact of this for a uni-directional TCP NewReno flow from
Paris to Moscow. Both the estimated RTT in Fig. 18(b) and the TCP
congestion window in Fig. 19(b) show the effect of the aforemen-
tioned sharing of the network device between the data packets and
the ACKs. The throughput over the bent-pipe connection is also
modestly lower for the same reason, as seen in Fig. 19(c).
We also see, from comparing Fig. 19(a) and Fig. 19(b), that at
least in this instance, TCP behavior is markedly different for the
bent-pipe connection, with many more fluctuations in the conges-
tion window. The reason is that ISLs and bent-pipe connectivity
engender different bottleneck behavior in this case. The bottleneck
with ISLs, is the outgoing network device from the first (source)
GS. For the bent-pipe, due to the sharing of the path across data
packets and ACKs, the bottleneck is the first satellite-to-ground
link. Now as satellites in the path change, specifically the first
satellite, the queue size at this satellite varies substantially over
time. Re-ordering events that trigger TCP to interpret loss occur at
𝑡= 52.9, 86.3, 92.5, 147.2, and 162.1𝑠, the precise points in Fig. 19(b),
where the congestion window drops.
Note that this low-level behavior depends on how the network
devices are configured, e.g., multiple separate queues for uplink
traffic would change the behavior substantially. With cross-traffic,
the ISL case may also exhibit similar behavior, with more frequent
reordering as the bottleneck moves away from the first up-link
device. We thus caution readers against drawing deeper conclusions
on TCP behavioral differences in bent-pipe versus ISL connectivity
from this small experiment; this experiment is merely meant to
demonstrate Hypatia’s ability to support bent-pipe constellations.

IMC ’20, October 27–29, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Kassing and Bhattacherjee et al.
(a) Connectivity over ISLs.
(b) Bent-pipe connectivity. The grid shows the candidate GS relays.
Fig. 16: Paris to Moscow connectivity over Kuiper at the start, 𝑡= 0. Black dots represent satellites, yellow dots are candidate GS relays, and green
dots represent endpoint GSes and chosen GS relays.
(a) Connectivity over ISLs at 𝑡= 159.4 𝑠.
(b) Connectivity over GS relays at 𝑡= 158.3 𝑠.
Fig. 17: Paris to Moscow connectivity over Kuiper at around 𝑡= 159.
(a) TCP estimated RTT with ISLs
(b) TCP estimated RTT with bent-pipe
(c) Bent-pipe has higher RTT.
Fig. 18: RTT over time. In both cases, queueing delay at the low bandwidth of 10 Mbit/s inflates RTT far beyond the computed RTT in (c).
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
CWND
BDP+Q
BDP
# of packets
Time (s)
(a) TCP congestion window with ISLs
(b) TCP congestion window with bent-pipe. ACKs can
queue behind data packets, causing an artificial inflation
in congestion window.
(c) Bent-pipe achieves modestly lower rate.
Fig. 19: TCP behaves differently for the ISL and bent-pipe cases, primarily due to different bottleneck behavior as the ACKs share the same
bottleneck in our configuration for bent-pipe connectivity.

