×Grid: A Location-oriented Topology Design for LEO
Satellites
Joseph McLaughlin
jmclaug2@uoregon.edu
University of Oregon
Jee Choi
jeec@uoregon.edu
University of Oregon
Ramakrishnan Durairajan
ram@cs.uoregon.edu
University of Oregon
ABSTRACT
The high frequency at which handoff occurs between in-
terconnected low-earth orbit (LEO) satellites pose a signifi-
cant challenge in successfully implementing a satellite-based
global Internet service. This is primarily due to the fact that
LEO satellites only remain in range for approximately 3 min-
utes at a time, resulting in client state handoffs occurring 20x
per hour. In this paper, we propose ×Grid, a topology design
for LEO satellites that leverages the predictability of satellite
positions. Our design is location-oriented, allowing handoff
to occur between satellites that share interconnected satellite
links (ISLs). This approach contrasts with the current con-
ventional topology designs, which require propagating client
state information throughout the network and performing
unnecessary computations to determine the appropriate re-
turn node for packets. Through simulations, we demonstrate
that the ×Grid reduces the number of ISL hops between
major population centers and decreases the occurrence of
dropped messages during handoff compared to conventional
topology designs.
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in satellite technology, combined with
streamlined satellite launch processes pioneered by com-
panies (e.g., SpaceX, Kuiper), have revitalized the research
focus on satellite networks for both commercial and research
applications. These networks would exist in low-earth or-
bit (LEO) at a height of between 500–1,500 km above the
surface of the earth and with an orbital period of at most
100 minutes. These constraints mean LEO satellites move
at approximately 7,500 m/s and are within the operational
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
LEO-NET ’23, October 6, 2023, Madrid, Spain
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0332-4/23/10...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3614204.3616110
range of terrestrial ground stations for only minutes at a
time. Their low altitude when compared with other satel-
lite classes, e.g., geostationary orbit (GEO), minimizes the
latency (e.g., round-trip times or RTTs) in over-the-air com-
munication which can be considerable at greater altitudes.
To compensate for their low orbit, satellites are organized
in constellations where any number of satellites co-exist in
coordinated patterns.
Several companies have recently filed constellation plans
with the US FCC including SpaceX with two separate fil-
ings, one for 4,408 satellites, a second for 30,000 satellites,
and OneWeb with 47,844 satellites [1–3]. Researchers from
several domains have explored the impact that these constel-
lations could have on astronomical observations and collision
likelihood [11, 18]. We observe that these filings have be-
come the basis for much of the contemporary research into
interconnected LEO satellite networks for global Internet.
Several recent research efforts have supported our obser-
vation regarding the feasibility and challenges of intercon-
nected LEO satellite networks, primarily based on a common
network topology derived from SpaceX FCC filings. For ex-
ample, [12] discusses how return packets may not route to
the correct node if the satellite is not longer overhead. The
authors use Dijkstra’s algorithm on a model SpaceX network
adapted to the estimated RTT to select the appropriate path
[9]. However, RTT would have to be known for every route
and at every time a packet was sent, as the physical orienta-
tion of the network evolves in space and in time. This also
incurs additional computation that would likely occur on
the (satellite) nodes themselves, draining precious resources,
such as energy and computational power.
Since then, other researchers have explored the feasibil-
ity of interconnected satellite networks. [13] questioned the
viability of Interconnected Satellite Links (ISLs), while [4]
further investigated the duration of handoff sessions. Fur-
thermore, studies have examined potential applications of
LEO satellite networks, such as edge computing, load balanc-
ing, and network security [7, 8, 17, 20]. Additionally, models
have been developed to characterize satellite features like
latency, traffic, and routing [10, 16]. It is worth noting that all
these studies have relied on the conventional SpaceX topol-
ogy, which we believe does not fully leverage the unique
37

LEO-NET ’23, October 6, 2023, Madrid, Spain
Joseph McLaughlin, Jee Choi, and Ramakrishnan Durairajan
Element
Altitude
Inclination
Number of planes
Satellites per plane
Total
1
550
53.0
72
22
1584
2
540
53.2
72
22
1584
3
570
70.0
36
20
720
4
560
97.6
6
58
384
5
560
97.6
4
43
172
Table 1: SpaceX April 2020 FCC Filing.
aspects of LEO satellites and incurs significant computational
overheads.
To address these challenges, we introduce ×Grid, a novel
topology design that takes advantage of the predictable na-
ture of satellite movements and allows handoff to occur be-
tween satellites that share ISLs. At the core of ×Grid is the
insight that the future positions of satellites are predictable—
a significant departure from state-of-the-art. While previous
studies (e.g., [12]) have also acknowledged this aspect, as
noted above, their approach primarily relies on a SpaceX-
based topology rather than fully leveraging the predictability
of satellite positions. By adopting a “location-oriented" ap-
proach, ×Grid accommodates the satellite motion relative
to a ground station (GS). This location-oriented design elim-
inates computational overheads in determining the return
node, forming the basis for our low-cost routing scheme in
×Grid. Finally, SpaceX’s recent progress in deploying LEO
satellites equipped with laser communication terminals to
establish inter-satellite links (ISLs), providing the necessary
technology for the realization of ×Grid. As shown in [13],
laser-based ISL is anticipated to deliver exceptionally low-
latency performance (e.g., 10 ms).
We evaluate the efficacy of ×Grid by building a custom
simulator using PyEphem [19] and TCP sockets to model the
×Grid network alongside a conventional network design. We
also simulate the routing scheme supported by ×Grid. We
demonstrate with simulation that ×Grid alone reduces the
number of hops between major population centers, and that
the routing scheme eliminates packet drops during client
handoffs.
2
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we provide a brief background on satellite
orbit geometry, followed by the assumptions we make in our
work. We also review the limitations of the state-of-the-art.
2.1
Satellite orbits
The classical, keplerian model for satellite orbits is constructed
from six parameters. We can eliminate some of these param-
eters for our purposes by assuming a near circular orbit. The
eccentricity, 𝑒, describes the shape of an orbit, where 1 < 𝑒
is a hyperbolic orbit and 0 < 𝑒< 1 is an elliptical orbit. By
fixing a small eccentricity (𝑒−𝜖= 0), we only consider the
parameters describing the orbital plane, i.e., the path around
the earth in which satellite travels.
• 𝑖– inclination, the angle between the path of the satel-
lite and the equator.
• 𝜔– right angle of the ascending node, the longitude
where the orbit crosses the equator.
• 𝜃– anomaly, a value describing the location of the
satellite in its orbit.
Here, we exclude mean motion (revolutions per day) and
altitude which are dependent upon each other. Instead, we
fix mean motion such that it yields the appropriate altitude.
2.2
Constellations
Interconnected satellite networks are characterized by two
common constellation designs. The first contains several
concentric polar orbital planes (i.e., 𝑖= 90◦) equally spaced
around the equator. This design is notable for its vertical
seam where the two adjacent planes have a high relatively
velocity. It is expected that inter-satellite communication
will be uniquely challenging if not impossible at this seam.
The second contains several concentric orbital planes with
non-polar orbits𝑖< 90◦. This design concentrates more satel-
lites in equatorial regions, i.e., population centers. FCC filings
from SpaceX and OneWeb utilize delta pattern constellations
and have thus become the standard when studying these
networks.
SpaceX, OneWeb, and Kuiper have filed with the FCC to
launch global-scale satellite constellations. Each of these con-
stellations are comprised of several orbital shells that can
each be considered a distinct delta configuration at different
altitudes. It is likely that a single orbital shell will be insuffi-
cient to serve the global population thus the various orbital
shells serve as redundancies. In practice, it will be operative
for the ground station to select the shell with the least traffic
as inter-shell ISL communication is likely infeasible. For our
work, we consider a single orbital shell in a single FCC filing
from SpaceX. The entire filing is listed in Table 1. To model
our network, we consider only element 1 which we utilize
as a backbone network connected to fixed GS terminals. We
intend to explore others as part of future work.
2.3
Limitations of +Grid
The term “+Grid" was coined to formalize the delta constella-
tion network topology used in the study of satellite networks
[5]. This design is illustrated in Figure 1 with a staggered
𝜃value. In +Grid, inter-satellite links (ISLs) are established
between the leading and trailing satellites within the same or-
bital plane and between satellites on adjacent orbital planes.
We refer to these as 𝜃-neighbors and 𝜔-neighbors, respec-
tively. This configuration has become the default and state-
of-the-art choice for modeling satellite networks. However,
some researchers have demonstrated the limitations of +Grid
and have proposed alternative configurations to reduce traf-
fic and improve latency [5].
38

×Grid: A Location-oriented Topology Design for LEO Satellites
LEO-NET ’23, October 6, 2023, Madrid, Spain
Figure 1: A staggered +Grid configuration plotted on an
equirectangular projection. Connecting lines denote ISLs,
circles denote satellite field-of-view. Direction of motion fol-
lows the connecting lines from top left to lower right. As-
cending portions of the orbits are excluded. Propagated using
pyephem [19].
The staggered +Grid construction offsets every other or-
bital plane to achieve a more consistent coverage geome-
try. This construction selects adjacent 𝜃-neighbors and 𝜔-
neighbors for establishing ISLs. Intuitively, handoffs1 could
occur between adjacent satellites within the same plane.
However, the field of view (FOV), defined by a 40◦angle
of elevation, does not overlap, necessitating handoffs be-
tween different orbital planes. Figure 2 illustrates this con-
cept, oriented parallel to the motion of the satellite orbit
(parallel to the orbital plane). In this figure, our orbit is in-
clined at 53◦, causing the line connecting 𝜔-neighbors to be
non-perpendicular to the orbital plane, resulting in a jagged
line due to the staggered construction. We observe that the
handoff path can vary based on the ground station’s loca-
tion within a satellite’s FOV. Furthermore, we notice that
handoffs always occur between orbital planes and, in some
cases, traverse multiple planes. Additionally, only 1/4 of all
handoffs take place between satellites connected by ISLs.
3
DESIGN AND OVERVIEW OF ×Grid
In this section, we propose an alternative topology, ×Grid,
which simplifies client handoff procedures using pyephem’s
kelperian orbit models [19], overcoming the limitations of
the +Grid described above. Additionally, we describe a low-
cost routing scheme atop ×Grid which selects the correct
return node without computing the state of the network.
3.1
Key Insight
We recognize a pattern in Figure 2, namely for a satellite
in a staggered delta pattern, handoff will occur between
1Handoff refers to a state transfer between two devices to maintain an un-
interrupted connection and is necessary in most wireless networks. In LEO
satellite networks, handoff refers to the migration of ground station state
between satellites, and typically occurs on frequent and regular intervals.
Figure 2: Illustration of staggered +Grid handoff. Due to a
shallow FOV, the handoff flow does not map to the network
topology, requiring multiple hops at most handoff. Orbital
planes are compressed making the satellite FOV appear wide.
the trailing satellite two 𝜔-neighbors away or the trailing
satellite of the opposing 𝜔-neighbor. In the latter instance,
this alternates between the adjacent 𝜔-neighbor and the 𝜔-
neighbor’s 𝜃-neighbor. This is illustrated in Figure 2 along
the leftmost handoff path, where the second handoff occurs
between 𝜔-neighbors where there is a link, but the third
handoff occurs between the 𝜔-neighbor’s 𝜃-neighbor where
there is not a link.
Using this information, we develop ×Grid, a network topol-
ogy based on ISL for delta constellations, guaranteeing seam-
less handoff between satellites linked by an ISL. We project
×Grid onto a equirectangular map in Figure 3. For clarity,
only the descending portions of the orbits are shown; the full
constellation has ascending orbits that trail from the bottom
rise from the southwest to the northeast.
We illustrate how ×Grid handles handoff in Figure 4. From
this figure, we see that all GSs within the FOV of the current
satellite are within the FOV of at least one ISL link. This is
patterned, and remains true for all subsequent satellites. The
handoff link can be determined by whether the node is above
or below the orbital plane (right or left in Figure 4). This can
be determined for future nodes, mapping the logical handoff
path ahead of time.
3.2
Location-oriented Routing Scheme
Having designed a topology that harnesses the predictabil-
ity of satellites’ positions in the future, we now focus on a
39

LEO-NET ’23, October 6, 2023, Madrid, Spain
Joseph McLaughlin, Jee Choi, and Ramakrishnan Durairajan
Figure 3: A ×Grid configuration plotted on an equirectangu-
lar projection. Solid lines denote ISLs, circles denote satellite
FOV. Dotted lines denote orbital planes. Direction of motion
follows orbital planes from top left to lower right. Ascending
portions of the orbits are excluded. Visually, ×Grid orients
half of ISLs parallel to the equator, where staggered +Grid
(Figure 1) routes longitudinal traffic diagonally.
routing scheme atop the topology to select the correct re-
turn node without incurring computational overheads. Con-
cretely, ×Grid allows us to consider a routing scheme that
takes advantage of the guarantee of handoff occurring be-
tween connected satellites:
(1) Outgoing messages from ground stations are forwarded
to the future handoff node, i.e., the forwarding node.
(2) Outgoing messages are tagged with the address of the
edge node and the forwarding node.
(3) Incoming messages are routed through the forwarding
node and back to the edge node.
(4) If the ground station is no longer in the FOV of the
edge node, the forwarding node delivers the message.
This scheme ensures that the address of returning packet
is known for the remaining of connectivity of with current
node and the duration of connectivity of the future handoff
node. For LEO satellites in this configuration handoff occurs
approximately every 3 minutes. This scheme guarantees the
return node is known for at least 3 minutes, though RTTs >
3 minutes would repeat this scheme using the selected for-
warding node as the edge node. This allows for any arbitrary
route between the forwarding node and the packet’s desti-
nation as long as the route terminates in under 3 minutes.
4
EVALUATION
We built a custom simulator using PyEphem [19] with TCP
sockets to measure the efficacy of our scheme during a hand-
off event. Our simulations consider five nodes: an echo server,
three satellite nodes, and a ground station node. To approx-
imate communication between a ground station and mul-
tiple satellites, we open a socket with each satellite from
the ground station; the ground station sends its outgoing
messages to every connected satellite and the satellite nodes
Figure 4: Logical illustration of ×Grid handoff. Handoff
flow maps directly to the network topology despite a shallow
FOV, requiring one hop at every handoff. Orbital planes are
compressed making the satellite FOV appear wide.
themselves reject or accept the message. TCP is also used by
the Hypatia software library [16] to model these networks.
We implement two routing schemes: (1) a simple routing
scheme that immediately swaps connectivity between satel-
lites at a given epoch for both +Grid and ×Grid and (2) an
implementation of our proposed location-oriented routing
scheme for our ×Grid. The simple scheme routes a message
from the source node to its destination and if handoff occurs
prior to a response it is routed inccorectly.
To approximate communication between destinations we
find the average number of ISLs between locations and add a
fixed a latency in the echo server. We add 2 ms of latency for
every ISL and 10 ms for every GS-to-Sat and Sat-to-GS link.
These valued approximate the latency of associated physical
systems that are commonly used [12]. When determining
the number of ISL hops for the simple scheme we consider
both +Grid and ×Grid.
4.1
Results
We simulate three paths, Los Angeles to New York City, Seat-
tle to Miami, and San Francisco to Washington D.C. Table 2
shows the average number of ISLs between locations. We fix
the latency of the source to 2×(2ms)×𝑘+(10ms)×3 where 𝑘
is the number of hops. As we are only seeking to characterize
40

×Grid: A Location-oriented Topology Design for LEO Satellites
LEO-NET ’23, October 6, 2023, Madrid, Spain
the efficacy during handoff, we evaluate the our network sim-
ulation over 10 seconds, executing client handoff half way
through. Table 3 shows the total number of TCP TCP mes-
sages sent in each scheme. We find that ×Grid significantly
reduced the number of hops and hence increased the total
number of messages we sent. In both the schemes (+Grid
and ×Grid) we observed that an average of three messages
were routed back to the incorrect satellite after handoff oc-
curred. We observed that no packets were dropped using
our location-oriented routing scheme, while an average of 8
packets were lost in the simple routing scheme during the 10
s handoff epoch. In one case, the location-oriented scheme
performs worse than the simple ×Grid scheme. This can be
explained by the additional two hops via the forwarding
node that the simple ×Grid scheme lacks.
Path
+Grid ISLs
×Grid ISLs
LA to NYC
12
6
SEA to Miami
7
7
SF to DC
12
4
Table 2: Average ISLs between locations in varying network
topologies.
Path
+Grid
×Grid only
×Grid + LO routing
LA to NYC
174
245
211
SEA to Miami
197
201
208
SF to DC
171
223
238
Table 3: TCP messages sent during a fixed (10 s) period for
the conventional +Grid model, an ×Grid with a conventional
routing, and an ×Grid model with location-oriented routing.
5
DISCUSSION
The results of our network study suggest that ×Grid alone
reduces the number of ISL hops by an average factor of two.
This is explained by a simple property of ×Grid, that being
that the second 𝜔-neighbor is selected over the first. Traf-
fic more commonly travels longitudinally so we benefit by
reducing the short ISLs that span across longitude in +Grid.
Additionally, the ×Grid topology more evenly distributes
ISLs over both latitude and longitude when compared to
+Grid or staggered +Grid.
5.1
Choosing the Forwarding Node
The choice of handoff node, i.e., forwarding node in the
routing scheme, would be trivial for fixed GS’s with a known
position that are firmly within the FOV of a single satellite.
This is illustrated by the red GS in Figure 4. However for
satellites under the FOV of two candidate handoff nodes, we
would likely select by the strong RF signals of the candidates.
Juan et al. [14] implement a similar regimen for 5G intra-
satellite RF handoff. In some of these less obvious cases,
the connection duration may be smaller if the GS passes
through the edge of the satellite’s FOV. In these instances
it may be necessary repeat the routing procedure on the
handoff node to gain an extra forwarding node. This scheme
assumes a GS has already selected a suitable satellite link,
but for every shell there are typically 2 candidate links for
every GS (ascending and descending), this work does not
address that issue.
5.2
A Persistent Challenge
The problem of handoff in these has yet to be well studied
or thoroughly characterized, despite the growing amount of
application research in the area. There has been significant
work in related networks such as LTE/5G communication
[6, 14] and small satellite networks [15, 21]. Our simulation
considered communication between two fixed ground sta-
tions at a short epoch around the time of handoff, though a
larger network with several GS links could further illuminate
the issues of the conventional +Grid paradigm.
6
SUMMARY
We presented a network topology for global constellations of
interconnected LEO satellite internet networks that supports
a low-cost, location-oriented routing scheme. We demon-
strate that ×Grid has fewer hops between common routes
than conventional +Grid configurations. The ×Grid topology
orients ISLs to the direction of motion, allowing client state
information to be handed off to direct neighbors. Addition-
ally, the routing scheme atop ×Grid facilitates the selection
of appropriate return node knowing only the estimated RTT.
We demonstrate efficacy of ×Grid and the routing scheme
through simple simulations. In this simulation we show that
×Grid alone delivers approximately 20% more packets due
to reduced latency in the number of hops, and that our rout-
ing scheme performs similarly to plain ×Grid while never
dropping packets due to handoff.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by an Internet Society (ISOC) Foun-
dation grant. The views and conclusions contained herein
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as nec-
essarily representing the official policies or endorsements,
either expressed or implied, of ISOC.
41

LEO-NET ’23, October 6, 2023, Madrid, Spain
Joseph McLaughlin, Jee Choi, and Ramakrishnan Durairajan
REFERENCES
[1] 2020. For Approval of Orbital Deployment And Operating Authority
for the SpaceX Gen2 NGSO Satellite System. (2020). https://fcc.report/
IBFS/SAT-LOA-20200526-00055/2378669.pdf
[2] 2020. For Modification of Authorization for the SpaceX NGSO Satellite
System. (2020). https://fcc.report/IBFS/SAT-MOD-20200417-00037/
2274315.pdf
[3] 2020.
Modification to OneWeb U.S. Market Access Grant for the
OneWeb Ku- and Ka-Band System. (2020). https://fcc.report/IBFS/SAT-
MPL-20200526-00062/2379569.pdf
[4] Akram Al-Hourani. 2021. Session Duration Between Handovers in
Dense LEO Satellite Networks. IEEE Wireless Communications Letters
10, 12 (2021), 2810–2814. https://doi.org/10.1109/LWC.2021.3118214
[5] Debopam Bhattacherjee and Ankit Singla. 2019. Network topology de-
sign at 27,000 km/hour. In Proceedings of the 15th International Confer-
ence on Emerging Networking Experiments And Technologies. 341–354.
[6] Jiaqi Chen, Xiaohu Ge, and Qiang Ni. 2019. Coverage and handoff
analysis of 5G fractal small cell networks. IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications 18, 2 (2019), 1263–1276.
[7] Bradley Denby, Krishna Chintalapudi, Ranveer Chandra, Brandon
Lucia, and Shadi Noghabi. 2023. Kodan: Addressing the computa-
tional bottleneck in space. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 3. 392–403. computational load balancing
for small leo networks.
[8] Xia Deng, Shouyuan Zeng, Le Chang, Yan Wang, Xu Wu, Junbin Liang,
Jiangtao Ou, and Chengyuan Fan. 2022. An ant colony optimization-
based routing algorithm for load balancing in leo satellite networks.
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing 2022 (2022).
[9] Edsger W Dijkstra. 2022. A note on two problems in connexion with
graphs. In Edsger Wybe Dijkstra: His Life, Work, and Legacy. 287–290.
[10] Giacomo Giuliari, Tobias Klenze, Markus Legner, David Basin, Adrian
Perrig, and Ankit Singla. 2020. Internet backbones in space. ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 50, 1 (2020), 25–37.
[11] Olivier R Hainaut and Andrew P Williams. 2020. Impact of satellite
constellations on astronomical observations with ESO telescopes in
the visible and infrared domains. Astronomy & Astrophysics 636 (2020),
A121.
[12] Mark Handley. 2018. Delay is not an option: Low latency routing
in space. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in
Networks. 85–91.
[13] Yannick Hauri, Debopam Bhattacherjee, Manuel Grossmann, and
Ankit Singla. 2020. " Internet from Space" without Inter-satellite Links.
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks.
205–211. questions viability of leo networks..
[14] Enric Juan, Mads Lauridsen, Jeroen Wigard, and Preben Mogensen.
2022. Handover Solutions for 5G Low-Earth Orbit Satellite Networks.
IEEE Access 10 (2022), 93309–93325. Deals with hand off for 5g satellites.
Specifically communication within a single satellite. Uses as similar
location-aware concept for multiple hex cells within a single satellite..
[15] Suresh Kalyanasundaram, Edwin KP Chong, and Ness B Shroff. 2001.
An efficient scheme to reduce handoff dropping in LEO satellite sys-
tems. Wireless Networks 7 (2001), 75–85.
[16] Simon Kassing, Debopam Bhattacherjee, André Baptista Águas,
Jens Eirik Saethre, and Ankit Singla. 2020. Exploring the" Internet from
space" with Hypatia. In Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measurement
Conference. 214–229.
[17] Chengcheng Li, Yasheng Zhang, Renchao Xie, Xuekun Hao, and Tao
Huang. 2021. Integrating edge computing into low earth orbit satellite
networks: Architecture and prototype. IEEE Access 9 (2021), 39126–
39137.
[18] Jonathan C McDowell. 2020. The low earth orbit satellite population
and impacts of the SpaceX Starlink constellation. The Astrophysical
Journal Letters 892, 2 (2020), L36.
[19] Brandon Craig Rhodes. 2011. PyEphem: astronomical ephemeris for
Python. Astrophysics Source Code Library (2011), ascl–1112.
[20] Qingqing Tang, Zesong Fei, Bin Li, and Zhu Han. 2021. Computa-
tion offloading in LEO satellite networks with hybrid cloud and edge
computing. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 8, 11 (2021), 9164–9176.
[21] Jiang Wenjuan and Zong Peng. 2010. An improved connection-oriented
routing in LEO satellite networks. In 2010 WASE International Confer-
ence on Information Engineering, Vol. 1. IEEE, 296–299.
42

