Network topology design at 27,000 km/hour
Debopam Bhattacherjee, Ankit Singla
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
ABSTRACT
Upstart space companies are actively developing massive constel-
lations of low-flying satellites to provide global Internet service.
We examine the problem of designing the inter-satellite network for
low latency and high capacity. We posit that the high density of
these new constellations and the high-velocity nature of such sys-
tems render traditional approaches for network design ineffective,
motivating new methods specialized for this problem setting.
We propose one such method, explicitly aimed at tackling the
high temporal dynamism inherent to low-Earth orbit satellites. We
exploit repetitive patterns in the network topology to avoid ex-
pensive link changes over time, while still providing near-minimal
latencies at nearly 2× the throughput of standard past methods. Fur-
ther, we observe that the geometry of satellite constellations admits
more efficient designs, if a small, controlled amount of dynamism
in links is permissible. For the leading Starlink constellation, our
approach enables an efficiency improvement of 54%.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Networks →Topology analysis and generation; Network
dynamics; Network design and planning algorithms; Network per-
formance modeling.
KEYWORDS
low Earth orbit satellite, LEO, satellite network, Internet broadband
constellation, topology, network topology design, inter-satellite
link, motif
ACM Reference Format:
Debopam Bhattacherjee, Ankit Singla. 2019. Network topology design at
27,000 km/hour. In The 15th International Conference on emerging Network-
ing EXperiments and Technologies (CoNEXT ’19), December 9–12, 2019, Or-
lando, FL, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3359989.3365407
1
INTRODUCTION
Internet infrastructure is potentially at the cusp of a radical change.
While Starlink [69], SpaceX’s proposed constellation of ∼12,000
satellites, has captured the public imagination with its first 60 test
satellites already in orbit, it is only one competitor in a new “space
race” [11] to build satellite-based global Internet services. The large
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6998-5/19/12...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3359989.3365407
number of competing projects [6, 13, 17, 55, 73] at various stages
of maturity makes it likely that some such service will reach con-
sumers within the next decade.
While consumer-facing satellite networks have already existed
for decades [30], the new developments differ from these in their
goals, their scale, and the technology involved. The largest “NewS-
pace” constellations target cheap, global low-latency Internet cover-
age using thousands of satellites in low-Earth orbit (LEO; ≤2,000 km
altitude). Starlink’s stated objective is even to carry the majority
of Internet long-haul traffic [23]. In contrast, currently deployed
constellations like HughesNet [30] serve niches like rural cover-
age for at most a few million subscribers using tens of satellites
in geostationary orbit (GEO; 35,786 km), resulting in large laten-
cies of hundreds of milliseconds. While Iridium [32] and Iridium
NEXT [31] operate in LEO, they target the even narrower niche of
satellite telephony. The grander goals of the newly proposed mega-
constellations are made plausible by several technology advances,
including cheap access to orbit using reusable rockets, miniaturiza-
tion of satellites, and link-tracking technology that enables connec-
tivity between satellites that are fast-moving1 with respect to each
other and ground stations.
Given the promise and seeming inevitability of Internet broad-
band LEO constellations, we explore their network design. Recent
work shows that increasing the capacity of the inter-satellite net-
work would substantially improve throughput between terrestrial
ground stations [21], even after appropriate accounting for other
system bottlenecks like ground-satellite connectivity in an end-
to-end manner. However, this prior work focuses on higher-cost
inter-satellite links as the vector for increasing the capacity of
the satellite-satellite interconnect, ignoring the potential for supe-
rior network design instead. This approach is reflective of a more
widespread, usually implicit, assumption that inter-satellite links
must be local, and grid-like, e.g., with a satellite connecting to its
nearest neighbor in each direction, similar to that in (smaller) past
constellations. Available patents [40], visualizations [29] and analy-
ses [20, 21, 28, 47, 49, 60, 61, 75] feature this assumption. However,
this assumption is needlessly limiting (§2.3): in many cases, it will
be possible to connect to more distant satellites. These longer links
can improve the network’s throughput efficiency, as each end-end
connection then uses capacity on fewer, longer inter-satellite hops.
Allowing longer links greatly expands the design space, and
makes satellite topology design a highly non-trivial problem: given
a small number of inter-satellite links (ISLs) per satellite, how should
these be connected into a topology for maximizing network band-
width and minimizing latency? To the best of our knowledge, this
question itself, let alone answers to it, has not been put forth in
1This is a fundamental consequence of the lower orbits: LEO satellites orbit the Earth
in the order of 100 minutes, traveling at roughly 27,000 kmph.
341

CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
D. Bhattacherjee and A. Singla
prior work (§8), at least in the context of the mega-constellations
under development.
At first glance, this may appear to be a traditional network op-
timization problem, very much like that arising in, for instance,
data centers, where there is a long line of research on switch in-
terconnects rooted in graph theory [3, 10, 62, 74]. However, two
key aspects differentiate satellite network design from other well-
studied settings: (a) ISLs are limited by range, so that only relatively
nearby satellites can connect to each other; and (b) satellites are
moving with respect to the Earth and each other. The former is-
sue creates challenges for graph theoretic abstractions that do not
account for link locality, while the latter requires additional consid-
eration of the changing set of links that are feasible, as well as their
evolving distances from terrestrial endpoints. Network design is
NP-hard even in simple, static cases [33], so how do we tackle the
added complexity of the temporal dynamics?
We make a concrete case that intuitive network design approaches
drawn from experience in traditional settings are unsuitable for
this new, non-traditional problem context. Our exploration shows
that even with substantial problem-specific customization, methods
like Integer linear programming, random graphs, and ant-colony
optimization, fall short.
As a first attempt at addressing this problem, we propose a novel
approach exploiting repetitive patterns: if the topology is restricted
such that each satellite’s local view is the same as that of any other,
then one can limit topology design to the space of all possible local
views at just one satellite. We refer to each such local view as a
motif . This motif is then repeated across all satellites, with each
connected to its neighbors in the same way. Even for the densest
proposed constellations, the space of possible motifs, while non-
trivial, is small enough to search exhaustively and identify the
optimal motif for a target traffic matrix.
While this simple approach already provides a ∼2× efficiency
improvement over the neighbor-grid baseline, we further observe
that satellites are closer to each other at higher latitudes than at
the Equator, implying a larger set of possibilities for ISLs. Thus, the
motifs can be customized at different latitudes, providing further
improvements in network capacity. This insight enables efficiency
improvements even when we make worst-case assumptions about
the range of power-limited ISLs – for StarLink, with our approach,
network performance would improve over the neighbor-grid by
37% even in the most pessimistic scenario.
We also show that our approach effectively tackles the temporal
variations inherent to LEO satellite systems: ISLs based on mo-
tifs are maintained for long time periods, thus avoiding frequent,
expensive link changes2.
We acknowledge that there are several uncertainties (§7) in this
nascent research space. We thus take a broad perspective on the
problem setting by considering several potential outcomes for the
technology choices that could have an influence. We posit that this
approach is preferable to forgoing the opportunity of influencing
the design of the under-development satellite constellations, the
narrow window for which may close if we wait for greater clarity.
We make the following contributions:
2Link changes can require tens of seconds, thus being a substantial overhead if links
are operational only for a few minutes before each change.
Figure 1: Polar and inclined orbits with +Grid connectivity. An interactive 3D
visualization is also available online anonymously [58].
• We frame the problem of inter-satellite topology design for
large LEO constellations, showing why intuitive approaches
like Integer programming, random graphs, and ant-colony
optimization are unsuitable.
• We propose a new approach for designing such networks
using regular repetitive patterns, i.e., motifs.
• We further show how the spatial geometry of LEO constel-
lations admits customization of motifs applied to different
parts of the topology.
• We study the impact of allowed ISL range and setup time on
the effectiveness of our approach.
• We evaluate our ideas on the two largest proposed constel-
lations, Starlink and Kuiper, showing network performance
improvements of as much as 54% and 45% over neighbor-grid
connectivity respectively for a natural, population-weighted
traffic model.
• For Starlink, we find that even with pessimistic assumptions
about ISL range, network performance can be improved by
as much as 40%.
• The code and data used to generate the key results in this
paper are publicly available [12].
Beyond our specific approach and results, we hope our discussion
of this unique problem context and its constraints (§2, §3), together
with our analysis of how these defeat traditional methods (§3), will
help shape research in this area in a manner akin to early work on
data center networking [3].
2
BACKGROUND
Given the atypical problem setting, we provide background on key
aspects likely to help our networking audience.
342

Network topology design at 27,000 km/hour
CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
2.1
Satellite orbits and constellations
Fully describing orbits requires 7 parameters [51], but all the con-
stellations being proposed use fewer degrees of freedom, e.g., with
only circular orbits (with the same apogee and perigee), so we offer
the below simplified description:
Inclination is the angle between an orbit and the Equator as the satel-
lite travels northward. For polar orbits, the inclination is 90°. Orbits
with lower inclinations do not travel over the poles, spending more
time at lower latitudes. Fig. 1 shows 5 polar and 5 non-polar orbits.
As shown, for both types of orbits, the density of satellites increases
away from the Equator, simply due to the involved geometry. This
has important consequences for our design (§4.1, §5.1).
Altitude of a satellite is measured over sea level, and determines
its orbital velocity, e.g., GEO satellites must complete each orbit
in 24 hours, so their altitude must be 35,786 km. LEO satellites fly
lower than 2000 km; an orbital altitude of 600 km implies an orbital
period of less than 100 minutes.
Phase shifts capture the relative placement of satellites in a con-
stellation. Successive orbital planes cross the Equator at different
points; see e.g., the orbits in Fig. 1. If phase shifted uniformly, 30
orbital planes would have a separation of 12° between successive
planes. Each orbital plane can carry many satellites, e.g., if each
plane carries 20 satellites, successive satellites in a plane would be
separated by 18°. All proposed constellations use uniform phase
shifts, so for convenience, we shall refer to the number of satellites
per plane, n, and the number of orbital planes, p, instead of the
phase angles, with N = np being total constellation size. Further,
when n = p, we call a constellation an n2 constellation.
Numerous new satellite constellations have been proposed for
providing global broadband Internet service, including Starlink [69],
Kuiper [13], OneWeb [55], Telesat [73], LeoSat [46], and Hongyan [34].
We briefly describe only the largest two of these:
Starlink (SpaceX) plans to deploy ∼12,000 satellites [67–69]. The
planned LEO deployment comprises 4,425 satellites. The first phase
will use p = 24 orbits, each with n = 66 satellites, for a total of
N = 1,584 satellites. Orbit inclination will be 53° and the altitude
∼550 km. In addition to LEO satellites, Starlink also plans to later
deploy 7,518 VLEO (very low earth orbit) satellites at altitudes of
around 340 km.
Kuiper (Amazon) aims to deploy 3,236 LEO satellites [13, 42–
44] in three phases: phase A will be a 342 constellation with an
inclination of 51.9° and an altitude of 630 km; phase B will be a 362
constellation (42°, 610 km), and phase C will be a 282 constellation
(33°, 590 km).
These proposals are in a state of flux, with evolving deployment
strategies; our treatment of them is based on regulatory filings and
other public information up to date as of July 2019.
2.2
System dynamics
Moving from GEO to LEO satellites lowers latency, but it makes
the constellations highly dynamic. At a 550 km altitude, a satellite
travels at 27,306 kmph, covering in a minute distances comparable
to those between Munich–Berlin, Delhi–Lahore, or San Jose–Los
Angeles. Satellites in adjacent or nearby orbits of the same altitude
and inclination have low relative velocities near the Equator, but
80 km
R
hS
R
Maximum ISL length
Lower atmosphere ends
Earth’s surface
Figure 2: An ISL must not enter the Mesosphere. Thus, given the altitude of
satellites, one can easily calculate the maximum ISL length.
move faster relative to each other at higher latitudes. Thus, which
satellites connect to each other, and to which ground stations (GSes)
evolves over time. The changing distances between satellites, their
relative velocities, and the technology used, determine which con-
nections are feasible, and how fast they can be setup.
2.3
Connectivity
Satellites connect to GSes and other satellites. We focus on inter-
satellite links, and limit our treatment of satellite-GS connections
to mere visibility. Depending on a satellite’s location, it may only
be accessible to GSes in a cone underneath, with reach increasing
with the satellite’s altitude.
The low-latency and high-capacity goals of LEO networks ne-
cessitate inter-satellite links (ISLs), without which, long-distance
connections must ping-pong between GSes and satellites, incurring
a large latency penalty, as well as a reduction in the network’s
capacity, as each end-end connection consumes capacity at several
GS-satellite links. Thus, most proposed constellations feature links
between satellites.
ISLs are constrained by visibility and power, and to a lesser ex-
tent, by the ability to quickly establish links between fast-moving
satellites by radio or laser alignment, and compensating for Doppler
shifts and point-ahead angles. Even more than a decade ago, laser
ISLs at 5.6 Gbps over distances up to 4,900 km were achieved be-
tween LEO satellites [64]. Multi-Gbps rates have been achieved
even across 45,000 km between GEO and LEO satellites at high rela-
tive velocity [24]. Thus, speculation [28] on ISL capacities of tens of
Gbps is plausible. ISL setup times may range from a few seconds to
tens of seconds, depending on relative velocity and equipment [63].
Interference is not an issue for laser ISLs [63].
Existing non-GEO constellations like Iridium [32] use a grid-like
approach for their ISLs, considered standard in the industry and
related academic literature [81]: each satellite has 4 bi-directional
ISLs with its nearby neighbors, 2 in the same orbit, and 2 with
immediate neighbors in the 2 adjacent orbits. Such connections can
be maintained for long periods, as the connected satellites have
low relative velocities, except at higher latitudes. Minor variants
of such connectivity are possible, e.g., to a satellite with a positive
or negative phase shift in the adjacent orbit; one variant is shown
in Fig. 1. For convenience, we refer to this connectivity pattern as
+Grid, reflecting its shape.
There is a common, implicit assumption that new constellations
will use the same approach. This is reflected in visualizations and
analyses of connectivity in these constellations [20, 21, 28, 47, 60,
343

CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
D. Bhattacherjee and A. Singla
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 50
 100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450
402 LEO
Today's Internet
CDF across city-pairs
City-city RTT (ms)
Figure 3: RTTs between 8 big cities (28 pairs) over a 402 constellation with
+Grid connectivity, compared to today’s Internet.
75]. However, a simple (standard) calculation shows that this view
is unnecessarily restrictive.
The key visibility constraint is to avoid the ISL entering the at-
mosphere any lower than the Thermosphere [79]. This is the lowest
atmospheric layer devoid of water vapour, and starts at ∼80 km
above Earth’s surface. Thus, the minimum clearance of an ISL above
the Earth’s surface should be 80 km, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Given
these constraints, it is trivial to calculate the maximum ISL range,
e.g., for satellites operating at an altitude of hS = 550 km (Starlink’s
phase I altitude), the maximum ISL length can be calculated as
dISL = 5,014 km.
For small constellations with tens of satellites, this range con-
straint limits ISLs to satellites in the same or adjacent orbits. How-
ever, for the denser constellations being proposed, there are many
more possibilities: for a uniform 402 constellation at 53° inclination
and 550 km altitude, a satellite at the Equator could potentially set
up ISLs with 190 others.
There is, of course, another constraint: power, and relatedly,
equipment size and mass. For fixed desired link characteristics,
longer distances require more transmission power, and larger and
heavier equipment, which can be expensive in satellite systems.
While visibility is the likely limiting constraint, we also analyze
settings where range is limited by these other constraints (§4.6, §6).
2.4
Goals of satellite-based Internet
The objectives of the proposed constellations are to expand cover-
age to remote areas, as well as provide lower latency than terrestrial
networks. The potential for lower latency for long-distance connec-
tivity stems from (a) being able to build nearly-shortest paths (after
incurring the overhead for the up-down links) instead of circuitous
terrestrial fiber routes; and (b) transmitting at the speed of light in
vacuum, c, instead of that in fiber, 2c/3. Recent work has discussed
these potential improvements [11, 28, 39], but for completeness, we
include a short assessment of this.
We compare today’s Internet RTTs between some of the most
populous cities to the expected RTTs over a 402 LEO constellation
(53°, 550 KM) – a size and configuration similar to Starlink’s. We
used WonderNetwork ping statistics [80] for estimates of today’s la-
tency between (all pairs across) 8 most populous cities. We estimate
the satellite network’s RTTs by computing shortest-path routes
over the +Grid ISL configuration using the networkx library [54].
As Fig. 3 shows, the median (95th percentile) RTT improvement is
70% (65%). We acknowledge that this comparison is perhaps overly
favorable to satellite networks: overheads from sub-optimal rout-
ing, congestion and queuing, and forward error correction are not
accounted for here, while the WonderNetwork data, by averaging
30 real ping measurements, accounts for such overheads for today’s
Internet. Nevertheless, these overheads are likely to be small in
comparison to the tens to hundreds of milliseconds of RTT differ-
ences seen here, particularly if constellation operators explicitly
design towards low latency.
Providing this latency advantage to a large amount of global
traffic also requires that each satellite’s limited number and capacity
of ISLs be used such that the constellation achieves high throughput.
We use the number of on-path satellite hops as a simple proxy for
network throughput, drawing on prior network design work [62]:
an end-end connection traversing many ISLs uses capacity at each of
these, reducing capacity for other connections. Thus, with fixed ISL
count and capacity, reducing hop-counts for end-end connections
frees up bandwidth that can be used to serve more traffic.
A more precise approach would address various potential rout-
ing schemes, but make an already complex problem even more
difficult. Beyond this pragmatic justification based on tractability,
simplification to hop counts is also justifiable in terms of its ability
to yield insights in this context: given the low-latency objective,
routing is anyway restricted to paths that are the shortest or nearly-
shortest in terms of end-end latency. To support this argument,
we show later (§5.6) that compared to +Grid connectivity, with its
many-hop paths, our topologies achieve substantially lower con-
gestion under shortest path routing, by as much as 5× in terms of
the 90th percentile link congestion.
Similarly, our accounting for latency uses only propagation delay,
ignoring queuing and processing at each hop. However, accounting
for these would only improve our results, as we achieve much lower
hop counts than +Grid.
To summarize, ISLs must be chosen such that across end-end
connections they minimize both ISL hop count and latency. This
sets up the network design problem we address.
3
TYPICAL NETWORK DESIGN?
Given (a) a constellation’s satellite trajectories, (b) a small number
of inter-satellite connection units at each satellite, and (c) a target
traffic matrix between terrestrial endpoints; our goal is to decide
which satellite-satellite connections to build to minimize latency
and hop-count in end-end paths.
Static variants (ignoring satellite motion and Earth’s rotation)
of similar network design problems are known to be NP-hard [33],
but one could imagine the methods typically used in that setting
— Integer programming, linear program rounding, ant-colony op-
timization, random graphs, etc. — to be effective here. One might
even argue that the ISL design problem is a costly but one-time
effort that can perhaps be tackled using supercomputing resources.
We thus explored customizing three intuitive approaches to
address satellite topology design. We discuss why such techniques
are doomed to fail in the face of the problem’s complexity and the
344

Network topology design at 27,000 km/hour
CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
involved temporal dynamics. We also use this exploration to help
draw out the constraints and objectives more concretely.
3.1
ILP for a static snapshot
To handle the temporal variations in a somewhat brute-force man-
ner, one could potentially optimize a series of short-term static
snapshots using Integer linear programming.
Inputs:
• L: Maximum number of ISLs allowed per satellite.
• vab: Is sata visible to satb and within its range?
• dab: Linear distance between satellite sata and satb.
• A traffic matrix, H, between terrestrial sites.
While this approach can obviously use arbitrary inputs, for a
reasonable concrete instantiation, we assume that: (a) L = 4, in
line with information that can be gleaned from Starlink’s regula-
tory filings3; (b) only the visibility constraints determine vab, an
assumption we relax later (§4.6); and (c) H specifies traffic distri-
bution between the 1,000 most populous cities (2025 population
estimates [27]) as ground sites, with city-city traffic volume scaled
∈[0, 1] in proportion to the population products of the city pairs.
(We also examine a different workload based on economic activity
instead of population in §4.7.)
Note that we take a simplified view of connectivity between
ground sites and satellites, assuming that as long as a GS is within
range of a satellite, it can connect to it. In our concrete instantiation
with populous cities, we reduce the likely multitude of GSes in
such cities to just one per city, with arbitrary bandwidth and con-
nectivity towards satellites, limited only by range. Considering GS
placement and GS-satellite connections jointly in the optimization
is left to future work for several reasons: (a) it is unclear how much
of these decisions will be controlled by the constellation operators
if customers can buy and deploy GSes, as is being suggested by Star-
link [14]; (b) bottlenecks are likely to arise in both ground-satellite
and satellite-satellite connectivity, even if there is substantially
higher capacity in ISLs than for satellite up/down links [21]; and
(c) we believe a decomposed treatment of these complex problems
is fully justified, especially at this nascent stage, as even in mature
areas like data centers, there is precedent for such decomposition,
e.g., with routing and topology design.
Outputs: We must set (a) binary variablesyab that capture whether
an ISL between sata and satb is active; and (b) binary variables xst
ab
that capture whether traffic from endpoint cs to ct is carried over
an ISL between sata and satb.
Objective function: The output decisions must minimize a com-
bination of latency and ISL hop-count between the end points. For
each endpoint pair, we quantify latency in terms of stretch, i.e., the
ratio of the shortest-path distance across the designed network and
the geodesic distance. To aggregate our stretch (S) and hop-count
(B) measures, arbitrary linear combinations may be used. We define
Mα = αS + B, where α controls how much more we value stretch.
Most of our analysis weighs both factors equally (α = 1), but in
§5.5, we examine the impact of varying α.
3While recent work [28] concluded that there would be 5 ISLs, SpaceX revised their
filings later, with the new filings indicative of 4 ISLs.
Coarsely estimated path via satellites
A
B
S
T
Geodesic
Figure 4: ISLs far from S-T should not carry S-T traffic. The estimated S-A-
B-T path traverses the geodesics between S and A’s terrestrial nadir, up to A,
the ISL, down to B’s nadir, and the geodesic to T .
Finally, we define our objective function, Φα , as the sum of Mα
across endpoint pairs, weighted by the traffic matrix H. Minimizing
Φα minimizes system-wide stretch and hop count per unit of traffic.
Constraints: For brevity and ease of understanding, we omit the
mathematical formulation of the constraints in favor of intuitive
textual descriptions:
• ISLs are duplex.
• Each satellite should have ≤4 ISLs active.
• An ISL can be connected iff visibility allows.
• An ISL can carry traffic iff it is active.
• Flow should be conserved at satellites.
• End points should source or sink flow correctly per H.
Customized ILP: We invested substantial effort in studying and
improving the scalability of an ILP approach. To reduce problem
size, we added a heuristic, the intuition for which is shown in Fig. 4:
satellites “too far away” from the geodesic between an endpoint
pair shouldn’t carry its traffic. We obtain an estimate of the path
length between two end points, S and T, through an ISL between
two particular satellites, A and B by adding the geodesic distance
between S and A’s terrestrial nadir, the A-B ISL length, and the
geodesic distance between B’s nadir and T. If this estimate exceeds
the geodesic S-T distance by ≥1.5×, we restrict the ILP from
considering an A-B ISL to carry S-T traffic. This eliminates many
variables of xst
ab type. For the largest scales we could test, this
heuristic causes no compromise in optimality.
Results: We use a 402 LEO constellation (53°, 550 km) with a max-
imum ISL length of 5,014 km. We generated ILPs for increasing
numbers of cities, selected in order from the 1,000 most populous
cities. For smaller numbers of cities, the ILPs execute within rea-
sonable time, a few minutes to a few days, and provide optimal
ISL setup schemes. For 20 cities, the ILP-generated network’s Φ1 is
lower than +Grid’s by 54%, showing the substantial improvements
possible.
Issue #1: Limited scalability. Even for just 25 cities, the ILP does
not finish within 2 days on a machine with 64 cores and ∼500 GB
of memory. Further, extrapolating from smaller sizes, we estimate
runtime for 1000 cities to require 1029 days, which would remain
intractable even with perfect parallelism across a supercomputer.
Issue #2: Temporal dynamics. LEO satellites travel hundreds
of kilometers in minutes. Thus, ILP solutions generated minutes
apart would use very different ISLs, requiring a large number of
ISL changes. For 20 cities (the largest scale we could run the ILP
for), ILP topologies generated just one minute apart share only 9%
345

CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
D. Bhattacherjee and A. Singla
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
CDF across city pairs
City-city stretch or hop count
+Grid stretch
RRG stretch
RRG hop count
+Grid hop count
Figure 5: Compared to +Grid, random graphs (RRG) reduce hop counts
substantially, at the cost of a marginal increase in stretch.
of links. Even with (optimistic) ISL setup times of a few seconds,
this would be an unacceptable amount of link churn. With such a
large link churn, it’s unclear if/how any incremental link change
strategy would work either.
3.2
Random graphs
Inspired by network design in the data center context [62], we also
explored a generic solution that does not specialize to the traffic, but
works well across a variety of workloads: random regular graphs
(RRGs). These are graphs uniform randomly sampled from the space
of all regular graphs (i.e., with all nodes having the same number
of connections) of a target number of nodes (satellites) and degree
(4 links per satellite).
Customized RRG: Unfortunately, unlike the well-studied stan-
dard setting [52], it is unknown how to uniformly sample RRGs in
our setting, i.e., from the more restricted space of regular graphs
with link locality. However, to gain intuition for the shortcomings of
this approach, such rigor is not necessary, and we design a heuristic
process that samples the permissible edges (but gives no guarantees
about uniform graph sampling).
Our heuristic first lists all permissible ISLs based on visibility
constraints (at a time instant), and picks ISLs to add from this list
uniformly at random. An ISL can only be added if both satellites
involved still have fewer than 4 connections. We repeat this proce-
dure until no more new ISLs can be added. At this point, if only a
small fraction of ISLs are missing (i.e., some connectivity is unused),
we stop. Otherwise, for each satellite with fewer than 4 ISLs, we
remove all its ISLs and those of its neighbors, and add them back
to our sampling list, and continue sampling.
Results and challenges: To compare random graphs against +Grid,
we randomly select 5,000 city pairs and calculate the stretch, hop
count, and M1 with both topologies for each city pair. As Fig. 5
shows, by sacrificing median stretch by 11%, random graphs de-
crease the median hop count by 53%, and thus, the median M1 by
43%, and Φ1 by 42%.
Issue #1: Temporal dynamics. While random graphs overcome
the ILP’s scalability issue, unfortunately, they also suffer from the
system’s temporal dynamics: within 2 (5) minutes, more than 8%
(19%) of the ISLs become infeasible. Naively refreshing the entire
A’
B’
C’
A
C
B
Figure 6: A can connect to any satellites within its view (circle). If A chooses
B and C, repeating this pattern across the constellation fully specifies its ISLs.
Then any satellite A′ has the same local view of its connectivity, as shown. We
call such local views “motifs”.
topology every few minutes would change nearly all ISLs, causing
massive disruption. However, incremental changes are non-trivial
because a satellite for which an ISL becomes infeasible may not
be within reach of other satellites also in the same state, to which
it could connect. Thus, reconnecting lost connectivity in an incre-
mental fashion would require breaking and remaking even more
connections near such disconnected links.
Issue #2: Inflexibility. Unlike the ILP, random graphs do not ad-
mit explicit optimization towards a target traffic matrix, or for an
arbitrary α, i.e., they do not allow configuration of the tradeoff an
operator may want to make between stretch and hop-count. Instead,
they yield only one fixed choice in the trade-off space, as we discuss
later in comparison with our more flexible approach (§4).
We also spent substantial effort in customizing ant-colony op-
timization [22] to optimize the ISLs starting from a random graph.
This approach performs well for small problem sizes (few tens of
city pairs) but does not converge for larger cases, while also causing
high link churn. As the drawbacks are similar to the above two
methods, we omit the details.
3.3
Summary of the challenges
For large constellations like those proposed, we must configure
several thousand ISLs to meet desired latency and throughput goals
in a highly dynamic setting. We find that the problem’s complexity
even for a single snapshot, coupled with its temporal dynamics,
defeats traditional methods. An ideal solution would not only yield
substantial improvements over +Grid for a static snapshot of the
system, but also minimize churn in links to avoid the few seconds
to tens of seconds of overheads incurred from link changes (§2.2).
4
MOTIFS: SIMPLE YET EFFECTIVE
Our observations about the deficiencies of standard methods also
reveal the features of a practical solution: avoiding overly complex
optimization and link churn. We need solutions that marry the sim-
plicity of the +Grid with performance gains clearly shown possible
by other methods. Our proposed solution is thus a generalization
of the +Grid.
346

Network topology design at 27,000 km/hour
CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
4.1
Generalizing +Grid with motifs
As discussed in §2.3, for dense constellations, satellites can reach
(i.e., communicate with, using a single point-to-point link) other
satellites beyond only their nearest neighbors. Fig. 6 illustrates the
reach of satellite A in such a setting. If A picks two satellites, B
and C, to connect to from this reachable set, we can repeat this
connectivity pattern across the entire network (as shown in Fig. 6)
to obtain an ISL topology. Note that A’s other two ISLs are decided
by other satellites connecting to it in the same manner. Thus, every
satellite’s local view is identical. The 2 ISL choices for A are what
we refer to as a motif. More generally, a motif is a 3-satellite, 2-ISL
connectivity pattern, repeating which throughout the constellation
fully describes its ISL topology. Henceforth, we use motif to refer
to both the connectivity pattern, and its resulting topology.
Different motifs describe a family of topologies, with the +Grid
being a member of this family. The simplest version of our approach,
which we improve upon later, involves exhaustively evaluating all
possible motifs to pick the one with the best performance. For any
satellite, enumerating all possible connectivity patterns involves
finding nearby satellites to which direct point-to-point links are fea-
sible based on any specified ISL range constraints4. Note however,
that satellites are farther apart at the Equator and closer to each
other at higher latitudes, implying that a near-Equator satellites
have the fewest in-range satellites. Thus, for enumerating motifs,
we use a satellite at the Equator, ensuring that for any other satellite,
the considered motifs will only contain feasible links.
Having computed the set of satellites reachable from a satellite
at the Equator, it is easy to enumerate all feasible motifs: every
possible choice of 2 satellites from this reachable set is a motif. Due
to the symmetries involved, some of these motifs are equivalent,
e.g., in Fig. 6, for A, picking any two of the 4 satellites it is con-
nected to would lead to the same topology. Thus, using the spacial
symmetry around a satellite, we can cut the number of motifs in
an enumeration to only motifs that result in different topologies.
With the unique motifs enumerated, we simply evaluate any
metrics of interest, e.g., Φα , across them all. The motif with the best
metric value, i.e., lowest Φα , is chosen.
To summarize this procedure:
• Consider a satellite at the Equator, e.
• Let Se be the set of all satellites within e’s range.
• The set of all motifs, M = [Se]2 = {{a,b} : a,b ∈Se,a , b}
• As an (optional) optimization, cull equivalent motifs.
• Output the best motif m = arg min
x ∈M
Φα (x).
4.2
No link churn
Motifs obviously cover a limited subset of the space of possible ISL
topologies, but they describe a structured set of topologies with
stable connectivity, i.e., without ISL churn. In the example in Fig. 6,
A-B and A-C travel in sync, such that their relative velocities close
to the Equator are small and grow larger only at higher latitudes.
These changes are of precisely the same nature as in the +Grid.
4We only consider satellites in orbits traveling in the same direction to define motifs.
As one such set of satellites travels northward, another set crosses them traveling
southward; connections across these sets would be short-lived.
Figure 7: Different motifs present a large number of design points, with
different stretch and hop counts. The curve shows the Pareto frontier across
motifs trading off one metric for the other. +Grid provides low stretch, but
with very high hop count. The mm1, mm5, mm10 points are for the more
sophisticated approach we discuss later in §5.
Thus, each satellite is continuously connected to the same satellites
— even at higher latitudes as satellites change directions, we still
maintain the same connections. Thus, motifs provide long-term,
stable connections throughout the topology.
4.3
Performance at an arbitrary snapshot
For the same 402 constellation as in §3, we find that 1029 unique mo-
tifs exist. Fig. 7 shows the topology’s average stretch and hop-count
for each such motif at one arbitrarily chosen system snapshot in
time. The metrics are computed in the same manner as in §3, using
the population-product traffic matrix across popular cities. For clar-
ity, we trim the plot to leave out motifs with overly large stretch or
hop count. The plot includes the random graph approach; we used
100 trials and show the mean across them. +Grid achieves an aver-
age weighted stretch and hop-count of 1.25 and 10.57 respectively.
We can draw several insights from these results:
• Different motifs differ widely in their performance.
• Motifs expose a trade-off between stretch and hop count,
with several motifs at the Pareto frontier. Random graphs
provide only one point in the design space.
• Motifs at the Pareto frontier can exceed the random graph’s
performance, while allowing greater flexibility for optimiz-
ing whichever metric we value more.
• +Grid also has nearly the lowest stretch, but very high hop
count: a motif that compromises 2% (10%) on stretch, can
improve hop count by 32% (47%).
Besides system-wide average metrics, we also examine their
distribution across city-pairs. The best motifs improve median (95th
percentile) M1, M5, and M10 by 44.5% (54%), 26.2% (37%), and 16.8%
(22.3%) respectively over +Grid.
Unfortunately, we could not run the ILP at the same scale for
inclusion in Fig. 7. At the largest scale we could run the ILP (20
cities), it achieves 54% lower (better) Φ1 than +Grid. The motif’s Φ1
is 45% better than +Grid, but 18% worse than the ILP. We remind
the reader that the ILP is not a practical approach for the reasons
discussed earlier (§3.1).
347

CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
D. Bhattacherjee and A. Singla
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
Best motif
+Grid
CDF across time
Instantaneous Φ1
Figure 8: Motifs, like +Grid, show little variation in Φ1 across time.
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
162
242
322
402
+Grid
Best motif
Φ1
Constellation size
Figure 9: As constellation size increases, the utility of motifs increases. For
+Grid, stretch improves only marginally, while hop counts increase substan-
tially with size due to neighbor-only connectivity.
4.4
Performance over time
While motifs provide link stability, how does a motif’s performance
for a given traffic matrix evolve with time, as the constellation
moves in sync across the Earth’s surface? To address this question,
we use the same (fixed) motif as in §4.3, which achieves the best Φ1.
We evaluate Φ1 at a minute-by-minute granularity across a 2 hour
period, which is more than one orbital period for the constellation.
Fig. 8 shows the distribution of Φ1 over these per-minute snap-
shots. The best motif achieves Φ1 44% (43%) lower than +Grid in the
median (95th percentile). Variation in Φ1 over time is within 10% of
the median for both. Thus, motifs provide consistent improvements
over the naive +Grid approach, without depending on any dynamic
ISL reconfiguration.
4.5
Effect of constellation configuration
We also assess the utility of motifs for constellations of different
configurations in terms of size and orbital inclination.
Size: We evaluate motifs and +Grid on uniform constellations (53°,
550 km) of various sizes: 162, 242, 322, 402. For small constellations,
both +Grid and the best motif leave many city pairs without con-
nectivity through the constellation. Both topologies have the same
numbers of disconnected city pairs, because these stem from lack of
GS-satellite visibility rather than ISLs. Thus, we evaluate Φ1 across
connected city-pairs.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
Best motif, 53°
Best motif, Polar
+Grid, 53°
+Grid, Polar
CDF across city pairs
City-city M1
Figure 10: For the same constellation size, performance improves with in-
clined orbits as satellites spend less time over sparsely populated polar regions.
Improvement over +Grid is similar for both constellations.
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
+Grid
2000
2500
3000
4000
5014
Φ1
Max ISL length (km)
Figure 11: Φ1 for the best motifs across different ISL ranges: a modest in-
crease in range beyond the minimum required for +Grid connectivity can
substantially improve performance.
Fig. 9 shows that for denser constellations, motifs yield larger
benefits. This is expected, as the number of candidate motifs in-
creases with density. The increase in Φ1 for +Grid with larger con-
stellations may appear odd, but is easily explained: while improve-
ments in stretch are small, particularly beyond 242, the hop count
increases rapidly with size as satellites only connect to their nearby
neighbors.
These results also capture how the nature of the problem changes
going from the smaller past constellations (much smaller than even
162) to the planned mega constellations. For smaller constellations,
the problem is rather finding the lowest altitude such that the
+Grid links clear the Mesosphere; see [53] for discussions along
these lines.
Inclination: We also examined motifs across a polar constellation
(90° inclination) of the same size (402) and altitude (550 km). These
results are shown in Fig. 10. The median improvement in M1 going
from +Grid to motifs is 46% for the polar constellation, compared to
44.5% for the 53° one. As expected, the 53° constellation has a 14%
lower M1 (with motifs, in the median) than the polar one, because
satellites spend more time over the densely populated regions and
thus fit our population-product traffic matrix better.
348

Network topology design at 27,000 km/hour
CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
4.6
Accounting for power-limited range
As discussed in §2.3, for a constellation at an altitude of 550 km,
visibility limits ISL range to 5,014 km. While our understanding is
that range is primarily limited by visibility, we also evaluate motifs
in settings where range is additionally stunted, e.g., by a severely
constrained power budget.
For the 402 constellation, the longest links in +Grid are 1,467 km,
giving us a lower bound on range. We thus evaluated ranges be-
tween this bound and the maximum of 5,014 km. Fig. 11 shows that
with 3,000 km range, the performance improvements are already
similar to the setting with the longer only-visibility-limited range.
Given that the primary purpose of these satellites is network con-
nectivity, it is unlikely that design decisions that stunt range to be
so severely limited will be made. As discussed earlier (§2.3), much
longer ISL ranges are practical today. In fact, some constellations
like Telesat will require higher range links (6,000 km [72]) due
to their lower density. Also, operators would likely want partial
deployments to already use ISLs, and given that satellites will be
farther apart in such sparser partial deployments, longer ISL ranges
than in the final deployment would be needed.
4.7
A different traffic matrix
While +Grid connectivity is completely traffic matrix agnostic, mo-
tifs permit some degree of customization towards the traffic – from
the sizable space of motifs, one can pick the motif that performs
best for a target traffic matrix. Of course, this is more limited cus-
tomization compared to solutions like ILPs, which allow complete
traffic-directed optimization (but are unsuitable for other reasons,
as discussed in §3.1).
The traffic that the topology is designed for will ultimately be
driven by market forces, regulators, and the geographic variation
in competing terrestrial connectivity. As such, it is difficult for
us to evaluate for the right traffic matrix. Throughout, we have
picked one reasonable, intuitive traffic matrix, in the form of the
population-product model. Briefly, we discuss another similarly
intuitive traffic matrix.
Instead of population, we consider economic activity, in terms
of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), as a proxy for Internet traffic,
based on the known correlation between Internet penetration and
GDP [4]. Thus, we use the top 100 cities ordered by their GDP [78]
as ground sites, with city-city traffic volume scaled ∈[0, 1] in pro-
portion to the GDP products of the city pairs. For the 402 inclined
constellation, the best motif achieves Φ1 34% lower (better) than
+Grid for this traffic matrix. While smaller than for the population-
weighted traffic model (48%), this is still a large improvement.
Considering time-varying traffic is left to future work, we note
that one could evaluate the potential motifs against snapshots of
traffic over a desired time period, picking the one that provides the
highest performance over time.
5
RICHER USE OF MOTIFS
Our simple motif approach achieves a substantial improvement
over +Grid connectivity. Next, we show that if a small (configurable
and controlled) amount of dynamism in connectivity is permissible,
this can further improve performance.
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2500
 3000
 3500
 4000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
53°
Polar
No. of possible motifs
Latitude°
Figure 12: The number of motifs possible increases with increasing latitude
because of smaller inter-satellite distances.
5.1
Non-uniform satellite distances
For both polar and non-polar constellations, the density of satellites
is not uniform across latitudes, as is clear from Fig. 1. This, in turn
implies that at some latitudes, a larger set of satellites is reachable
within a fixed ISL range, and consequently, more potential motifs.
This observation is quantified in Fig. 12, which shows the number
of motifs possible for satellites at different latitudes at an arbitrary
time snapshot for two 402 constellations, one polar, and one with
53° inclination. The ISL range is fixed at 5,014 km throughout. The
number of motif possibilities generally increase away from the
Equator up until each constellation’s limiting latitude. For the 53°
constellation, the motif options increase from ∼1,100 at the Equator
to ∼3,600 at 53°. Note that this density variation is not merely a
temporal effect that is present in some time snapshots and absent in
others – it is a persistent feature of these constellations stemming
from their satellite trajectories, with minor temporal variations
around this broader trend.
Using one uniform motif constellation-wide, as in §4, ignores the
increased potential ISL choices at higher latitudes. We next explore
how this observation may be exploited.
5.2
Exhaustive multi-motif search?
The success of exhaustive search across possibilities for constellation-
wide uniform motifs (§4) prompts us to consider whether the same
approach can be used to identify the best combination of motifs at
different latitudes.
We can logically think of a circular satellite orbit as four quad-
rants, and using symmetry, restrict our exhaustive search to one
quadrant. For a 402 constellation, 10 satellites are expected to be
in such a quadrant at any time. Per Fig. 12, each satellite has on
the order of 103 motif choices. A combinatorial search through
all combinations for all 10 satellites would thus involve on the or-
der of 1030 multi-motif combinations (modulo some reduction due
to consistency constraints across connections). Assessing a single
combination requires calculating shortest paths and hop counts
across its topology for large numbers of city pairs, incurring tens of
seconds of compute with the networkx library [54]. While the prob-
lem is embarrassingly parallel, it is simply too large: we estimate
that such an exhaustive search would require ∼1020 days even if 1
million compute cores were in use.
349

CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
D. Bhattacherjee and A. Singla
Figure 13: Multi-motif for a 402 constellation with three 18° latitude zones. Connectivity South of the Equator is similar, and thus omitted; the Pacific region
and higher latitudes are not shown either. This particular combination optimizes for Φ1, and uses a maximum ISL length of only 2,000 km, much lower than the
visibility limit of 5,014 km. A 3D visualization [57] is also available.
5.3
A coarser, iterative search
To overcome the complexity of exhaustive search, we use an itera-
tive heuristic. We consider zones of a width, W , of a few latitude
degrees. For instance, for a 53° constellation, if W = 18°, we have
3 zones: 0-18°, 18-36°, 36-53°. While we refer to only the positive
latitudes for simplicity, the 18-36° zone (for instance) also covers
latitudes from −18° to −36°.
We consider each zone separately, starting with the first. Within
a zone, the latitudes closest to the Equator determine the motifs
possible, as satellites are farthest apart there. For each motif pos-
sible in the first zone, we evaluate its Φ1 by populating the entire
constellation with it, and keep the best.
To move to the next zone, we remove all ISLs from the constella-
tion, except those connected to any satellite within the preceding
zone. We again identify all possible motifs for the zone, and exhaus-
tively evaluate performance with each motif populating the rest of
the constellation, leaving links from previous zone(s) fixed5. We
repeat this process until each zone has been used to augment the
motif combination.
Fig. 13 shows the motif combination generated using W = 18°,
and a maximum ISL length of 2,000 km.
5.4
Performance and link churn
Notice that as satellites traverse across latitude zones, now their
connectivity changes, unlike with a single motif. But by design,
the above procedure accommodates configuration of the degree
to which such dynamic ISL changes are permitted, by setting the
zone width, W . With W = 18°, a satellite changes its ISLs every
∼12 minutes, making an ISL setup overhead of a few or even small
tens of seconds tolerable. Lower W (more zones) could potentially
improve performance for static snapshots, but increases link churn,
thus suffering in practice from link setup overheads. However,
we find that performance improvements start to saturate after 3
zones (W = 18°): for 3 or more zones, Φ1 improves by 7% over
the single motif (one zone) while with 2 zones, the improvement
is 5.6%. For a 402 polar constellation (instead of 53° inclination),
multi-motifs withW = 18° improve over a single motif by 9.5%. We
remind readers that in the context of high-value investments like
5As we must adhere to the constraint of 4 links per satellite, this occasionally leaves
some connectivity unused at some satellites near zone boundaries.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 6
 6.2
 6.4
 6.6
 6.8
 7
3 zones
Single motif
CDF across time
Instantaneous Φ1
Figure 14: Multi-motifs cut variance across time compared to one motif.
the satellite constellations, these improvements, while not as large
as going from +Grid to the best single-zone motif, are nevertheless
substantial.
We also find that multi-motifs cut variability over time. We
examine minute-by-minute snapshots of the constellation built
using the multi-motif approach with W = 18° for a period of 2
hours. Fig. 14 shows that the multi-motif improves both median
Φ1, as well as the variation in Φ1 across time.
5.5
Performance for different metrics
An operator may prioritize stretch (S) or capacity (hop count, B). We
thus evaluate our approach for M1, M5, M10, (and correspondingly,
Φ1, Φ5, Φ10) where Mα = Sα + B (see §3.1).
Fig. 7 also shows, in addition to the average population-weighted
stretch and hop count for the single motifs and the random graph,
the same metrics for 3 multi-motifs (markedmm1,mm5, andmm10),
each optimized towards the three Φα ’s mentioned above. As the
results show, the improvements are significantly beyond the Pareto
frontier achievable with single motifs. For Φ1, Φ5, and Φ10, the
improvements are respectively 48%, 30%, and 20% over +Grid.
Base metrics: Through most of our discussion, to be able to work
with one optimization criterion and for sake of brevity, we have
compressed the stretch and hop-count objectives into the joint Φα
metrics. It is however worth noting that higher α values understate
the improvements, because changes in stretch, which is given a
350

Network topology design at 27,000 km/hour
CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
 256
 0
 400
 800
 1200
 1600
+Grid
mm10
mm1
No. of paths using a link
Links ordered by usage
Figure 15: +Grid congests ISLs more due to the higher hop counts.
large weight, are smaller across a wide range of topology designs
compared to hop-count, which varies more. For instance, the 20%
improvement in Φ10 with mm10 is composed of 53% reduction in
hop count, while increasing stretch by only 9%, compared to +Grid.
As noted earlier in §4.3, even small compromises in stretch (e.g., 2%)
yield a large reduction in hop count (respectively 32%). The broader
point worth emphasizing is that we can pick motifs or multi-motifs
that optimize for a wide range of stretch and hop-count objectives.
5.6
Hop counts and congestion
Hop counts are an intuitive measure of network capacity, with
fewer hops implying lower in-network capacity utilization per end-
end connection. They are also easier to evaluate efficiently, and
incorporate into optimization, than, e.g., network throughput as
measured with some routing scheme. Nevertheless, to alleviate con-
cerns about the potential gap between hop counts and congestion,
we analyze congestion under shortest path routing.
For the same 3 multi-motifs as in §5.5, we analyze the levels
of congestion assuming routing on lowest-latency paths. For each
of 5,000 randomly selected city pairs, we compute lowest-latency
paths between them, and count the frequency of appearance of
each ISL in such paths. (This is referred to as “edge betweenness
centrality” in graph theory.)
Fig. 15 shows the top quartile of ISLs sorted by their frequency
of use (x-axis) against the number of paths using each ISL (y-axis).
Compared to the multi-motifs, +Grid uses each ISL in many more
paths, indicative of higher congestion. The 75th and 90th percentile
link-use frequency for +Grid is 4× and 5× that of mm1 respectively.
Across multi-motifs, as we prioritize stretch more (mm10), conges-
tion increases; mm5 lies between mm1 and mm10, and is omitted
for clarity.
6
OPTIMIZING STARLINK & KUIPER
Our design methods are meant to be general enough for application
to arbitrary future constellations, but we assess their effectiveness
for the first phase deployments of SpaceX’s Starlink and Amazon’s
Kuiper constellations.
SpaceX Starlink: Starlink’s first phase will have 1,584 satellites,
in 24 orbits (53°, 550 km), each with 66 satellites. We evaluate our
approach using both (a) the maximum ISL range, with only the
Visible range ISLs
Min range ISLs
median M1
Φ1
median M1
Φ1
Starlink
52%
54%
37%
40%
Kuiper
38%
45%
1%
4%
402
45%
48%
9%
7%
Table 1: %-values are improvements over +Grid achieved by a 3-zone multi-
motif. For Starlink, even min range ISLs yield large gains.
visibility constraint, which is 5,014 km (§4.6); and (b) the minimum
range necessitated by +Grid, 2,006 km. The latter represents worst-
case power-limited ISLs.
Amazon Kuiper: Kuiper’s first phase will be a 342 constellation
(51.9°, 630 km). In this case, the maximum and minimum ISL ranges
are 5,440 km and 1,761 km respectively.
Results: Table 1 shows improvements in the M1 (median across
city-pairs) and Φ1 (weighted M1 sum) for Starlink, Kuiper, and
a 402 constellation. The largest reductions in the metrics are for
Starlink, where even with worst-case assumptions about ISL range,
improvements of 37% (median M1) and 40% (Φ1) are achievable. This
is due to Starlink’s structure with fewer orbits and more satellites
in each orbit. Fewer orbits imply that satellites in adjacent orbits
are farther from each other, necessitating a higher minimum ISL
range for +Grid, while a larger number of satellites per orbit imply
an increased number of candidates for longer ISLs.
7
LIMITATIONS & FUTURE WORK
The secretiveness of the industry, and several technology and mar-
ket unknowns, pose challenges unique to such work:
• The satellites’ ISL range and speed of link setup depend on
a complex calculus involving non-networking factors like
satellite weight and launch cost, making it hard to zero in
on the inputs for topology design.
• Market conditions, regulator oversight, and terrestrial con-
nectivity, will together drive workloads, making it impossible
to evaluate for the right traffic matrix.
• Space endeavors are prone to setbacks and changes, so the
setting we are studying is evolving. For instance, over the
course of our work, SpaceX updated its Starlink plans to use
lower and different orbits to address concerns about space
debris. The plans we use were up to date as of July 2019.
However, these uncertainties are poor arguments for not addressing
the technical challenges. There is, after all, a potentially short and
closing window for influencing the design of the planned constella-
tions. We thus attempted to address the uncertainties by accounting
for a broad set of likely inputs, e.g., best-case to worst-case ISL range,
slower or faster link setups, and two intuitive traffic models. At the
very least, even with the most conservative assumptions (i.e., worst-
case ISLs, single motifs with no link changes), our work shows
significant promise beyond the +Grid strategy widely assumed to
be the default.
We would, of course, like to extend this effort in several ways,
including accounting for temporal variations in the traffic matrix,
inter-linking of different phases of the large constellations, analyz-
ing settings with larger numbers of inter-satellite links, interplay
351

CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
D. Bhattacherjee and A. Singla
with ground-satellite connectivity, and co-design with satellite tra-
jectories and routing.
8
RELATED WORK
Prompted by the excitement around the upcoming planned LEO
constellations, three position papers appeared at the HotNets 2018
workshop [11, 28, 39]. Two of these efforts [28, 39] focus on routing,
while the third [11] broadly draws out the promise and challenges
of LEO networking. The latter work does list topology design as an
interesting question, but without a concrete framing, and focuses
on trajectory design, without any mention of the ISL interconnect.
A recent effort [21] compares the design of 3 recently proposed
constellations — Starlink, Telesat, and OneWeb, discussing how
the number of GSes would affect aggregate throughput offered by
such systems. The analysis assumes +Grid ISL connectivity, and
can be viewed as making a case for our work: the authors show
that if ISL link capacity were increased (via technology changes), it
would boost system throughput substantially for each constellation.
Note that the same positive outcomes can be achieved by making
efficient use of ISLs of a given capacity/cost, which is our approach
to the problem. Another effort [66] tackles connectivity between
pairs of small, resource-constrained CubeSats; this is a different
problem addressing only pairwise CubeSat-CubeSat connectivity,
not Internet connectivity via satellites.
A prior wave of interest in satellite networking in the 1990s
also spurred substantial academic work [1, 8, 15, 16, 18, 25, 37, 45,
50, 70, 76, 77, 81, 82], of which we only discuss the most relevant.
Wood (2001) [81] discusses trajectory design and +Grid connectiv-
ity, which we compare against. Gavish and Kalvenes [26] discuss
4 hand-designed variants of +Grid connectivity. These address a
specific problem in polar “π constellations”, where across a contin-
uous half of the Equator, all satellites travel northward, and in the
other half, all southward, with connectivity challenges at the bound-
aries between the two halves (“seams”). In contrast, the modern
constellations we tackle are all uniform (“2π”) and do not present
this particular topology problem. Further, the density of the new
constellations presents many more design choices than are open to
manual design. As we point out (§4.5), the nature of the problem
changes entirely for dense constellations, where far from feasibility
of connectivity being an issue, the choices for connectivity become
overwhelming, making such design-by-hand prohibitive.
There is also work on problems that affect, or are affected by
ISL topology: optimizing trajectories [9] and routing [2, 7, 65, 71].
While co-dependent, the complexity of these problems seems to
necessitate decomposition and separate treatment, at least while
research in this area matures.
Mobile connectivity has been studied in other contexts, includ-
ing high-speed rail [35], drones [48], and planes [38]. But none
of these simultaneously feature all the peculiarities of our setting:
(1)predictable motion of (2)thousands of (3)high-speed systems
(4)connected to each other with multiple links to (5)provide con-
nectivity between fixed endpoints. The problem itself differs fun-
damentally from past work, and naturally drives us to different
solutions as well.
In graph theory, motifs and “graphlets” are well studied, but from
a different perspective: identifying repetitive patterns of connectiv-
ity in given graphs [5, 36, 41, 56, 59]. Of course, even in terms of
design, the utility of repetitive patterns is long understood, e.g., in
areas like visual and graphic design [19]. To the best of our knowl-
edge, we are the first to systematically apply such ideas to satellite
network design.
9
CONCLUSION
We tackle network design for large satellite constellations, whereby,
with a small number of inter-satellite links, the network must sup-
port low latency communication for the largest traffic volume possi-
ble. Superficially, this seems similar to well-studied network design
problems. But our systematic analysis of intuitive methods drawn
from experience with such problems exposes their limitations in
this context, and hopefully, will push future work in this space
towards the development of new, specialized techniques.
We propose one such technique, using repetitive patterns to neu-
tralize the issues arising from such systems’ temporal dynamics,
achieving ∼2× higher efficiency than the state-of-the-art. We fur-
ther observe that the spatial geometry of the problem admits even
more efficient solutions, if a limited, controlled form of dynamic
interconnection is permissible. For the largest and most mature of
the planned constellations, Starlink, our approach promises 54%
higher efficiency under reasonable assumptions on link range, and
40% higher efficiency in even the most pessimistic scenarios. By an-
alyzing a range of uncertain constraints in this manner, we attempt
to arrive at robust results that we hope can influence the design
of the planned satellite constellations, as well as motivate further
research in this exciting space.
10
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Brighten Godfrey, Gregory Laughlin, Bruce
Maggs, Juerg Leuthold, our anonymous reviewers, and our shep-
herd Fabián Bustamante, for valuable discussions and feedback.
352

Network topology design at 27,000 km/hour
CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
REFERENCES
[1] Riza Akturan and Wolfhard J Vogel. 1997. Path diversity for LEO satellite-PCS
in the urban environment. IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation 45, 7
(1997), 1107–1116.
[2] Ian F Akyildiz, Eylem Ekici, and Michael D Bender. 2002. MLSR: a novel routing
algorithm for multilayered satellite IP networks. IEEE/ACM ToN 10, 3 (2002),
411–424.
[3] Mohammad Al-Fares, Alexander Loukissas, and Amin Vahdat. 2008. A scalable,
commodity data center network architecture. In ACM SIGCOMM CCR, Vol. 38.
ACM, 63–74.
[4] Shahram Amiri and Brian Reif. 2013. Internet penetration and its correlation
to gross domestic product: An analysis of the nordic countries. International
Journal of Business, Humanities and Technology 3, 2 (2013), 50–60.
[5] Mitra Ansariola, Molly Megraw, and David Koslicki. 2017. IndeCut evaluates
performance of network motif discovery algorithms. Bioinformatics 34, 9 (2017),
1514–1521.
[6] Astrome. 2018. SpaceNet: Best among the Next-Gen Satellite Internet Providers.
https://www.astrome.co/. (2018).
[7] Jianjun Bai, Xicheng Lu, Zexin Lu, and Wei Peng. 2004. A distributed hierarchical
routing protocol for non-GEO satellite networks. In Workshops on Mobile and
Wireless Networking/High Performance Scientific, Engineering Computing/Network
Design and Architecture/Optical Networks Control and Management/Ad Hoc and
Sensor Networks/Compil. IEEE, 148–154.
[8] Jason H Bau. 2002. Topologies for satellite constellations in a cross-linked space
backbone network. Ph.D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[9] Theresa W Beech, Stefania Cornara, Miguel Bell Mora, and GD Lecohier. 1999.
A study of three satellite constellation design algorithms. In 14th international
symposium on space flight dynamics.
[10] Maciej Besta and Torsten Hoefler. 2014. Slim fly: A cost effective low-diameter net-
work topology. In Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis. IEEE Press.
[11] Debopam Bhattacherjee, Waqar Aqeel, Ilker Nadi Bozkurt, Anthony Aguirre,
Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran, P Godfrey, Gregory Laughlin, Bruce Maggs, and
Ankit Singla. 2018. Gearing up for the 21st century space race. In ACM HotNets.
[12] Debopam Bhattacherjee and Ankit Singla. 2019. Network topology design at
27,000 km/hour. https://satnetwork.github.io. (2019).
[13] Alan Boyle. 2019. Amazon to offer broadband access from orbit with 3,236-
satellite ‘Project Kuiper’ constellation. https://www.geekwire.com/2019/amazon-
project-kuiper-broadband-satellite/. (2019).
[14] CASIS. 2015. ISSRDC 2015 - A Conversation with Elon Musk. https://tinyurl.
com/plnon58. (2015).
[15] Vincent WS Chan. 1999. Optical space communications: a key building block
for wide area space networks. In 1999 IEEE LEOS Annual Meeting Conference
Proceedings. LEOS’99. 12th Annual Meeting. IEEE Lasers and Electro-Optics Society
1999 Annual Meeting (Cat. No. 99CH37009), Vol. 1. IEEE, 41–42.
[16] Vincent WS Chan. 2000. Optical space communications. IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics 6, 6 (2000), 959–975.
[17] Kelsey Cheng. 2018. Chinese tech firm unveils the first satellite in its ambitious
plan to provide free worldwide Wi-Fi. https://tinyurl.com/y4mopmzm. (2018).
[18] Gary Comparetto and Neal Hulkower. 1994.
Global mobile satellite
communications-A review of three contenders. In 15th International Communica-
tons Satellite Systems Conference and Exhibit. 1138.
[19] M.L. Davis. 1980. Visual design in dress. Prentice-Hall.
[20] Olivier L De Weck, Richard De Neufville, and Mathieu Chaize. 2004. Staged
deployment of communications satellite constellations in low earth orbit. Journal
of Aerospace Computing, Information, and Communication 1, 3 (2004), 119–136.
[21] Inigo del Portillo, Bruce G Cameron, and Edward F Crawley. 2019. A technical
comparison of three low earth orbit satellite constellation systems to provide
global broadband. Acta Astronautica (2019).
[22] Marco Dorigo and Mauro Birattari. 2010. Ant colony optimization. Springer.
[23] Elon Musk. 2015. SpaceX Seattle 2015. https://youtu.be/AHeZHyOnsm4. (2015).
[24] ESA. 2013. Alphasat Optical Communication. https://tinyurl.com/y23vthrs.
(2013).
[25] John V Evans. 1998. Satellite systems for personal communications. Proc. IEEE
86, 7 (1998), 1325–1341.
[26] Bezalel Gavish and Joakim Kalvenes. 1997. The impact of intersatellite commu-
nication links on LEOS performance. Telecommunication Systems 8, 2-4 (1997),
159–190.
[27] Greater London Authority (GLA). 2018. Global City Population Estimates. https:
//data.london.gov.uk/dataset/global-city-population-estimates. (2018).
[28] Mark Handley. 2018. Delay is Not an Option: Low Latency Routing in Space. In
ACM HotNets.
[29] Mark Handley. 2018. Starlink revisions, Nov 2018. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=QEIUdMiColU. (2018).
[30] HughesNet. 2018. HughesNet: America’s #1 Choice for Satellite Internet. https:
//www.hughesnet.com/. (2018).
[31] Iridium Communications Inc. 2018. Iridium NEXT. https://www.iridiumnext.
com/. (2018).
[32] Iridium Communications Inc. 2018. Iridium Satellite Communications. https:
//www.iridium.com/. (2018).
[33] David S Johnson, Jan Karel Lenstra, and AHG Rinnooy Kan. 1978. The complexity
of the network design problem. Networks 8, 4 (1978), 279–285.
[34] Andrew Jones. 2018. China to launch first Hongyan LEO communications con-
stellation satellite soon. https://tinyurl.com/y4anchw7. (2018).
[35] Ouldooz Baghban Karimi, Jiangchuan Liu, and Chonggang Wang. 2012. Seamless
wireless connectivity for multimedia services in high speed trains. IEEE Journal
on selected areas in communications 30, 4 (2012), 729–739.
[36] Nadav Kashtan, Shalev Itzkovitz, Ron Milo, and Uri Alon. 2004. Topological
generalizations of network motifs. Physical Review E 70, 3 (2004), 031909.
[37] John D Kiesling. 1990. Land mobile satellite systems. Proc. IEEE 78, 7 (1990),
1107–1115.
[38] Ryan W Kingsbury. 2009. Mobile Ad hoc networks for oceanic aircraft communica-
tions. Ph.D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[39] Tobias Klenze, Giacomo Giuliari, Christos Pappas, Adrian Perrig, and David Basin.
2018. Networking in Heaven as on Earth. In ACM HotNets.
[40] Mark Krebs. 2016. Satellite Constellation. https://patents.google.com/patent/
US20170005719A1/en. (2016).
[41] Hillel Kugler, Sara-Jane Dunn, and Boyan Yordanov. 2018. Formal Analysis of
Network Motifs. In International Conference on Computational Methods in Systems
Biology. Springer, 111–128.
[42] Kuiper USASAT-NGSO-8A ITU filing. 2018. https://www.itu.int/ITU-R/space/
asreceived/Publication/DisplayPublication/8716. (2018).
[43] Kuiper USASAT-NGSO-8B ITU filing. 2018. https://www.itu.int/ITU-R/space/
asreceived/Publication/DisplayPublication/8774. (2018).
[44] Kuiper USASAT-NGSO-8C ITU filing. 2018. https://www.itu.int/ITU-R/space/
asreceived/Publication/DisplayPublication/8718. (2018).
[45] Kenneth Chun Hei Kwok. 2001. Cost optimization and routing for satellite network
constellations. Ph.D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[46] LeoSat. 2018. A New Satellite Paradigm and Unique Data Network Solution.
http://leosat.com/. (2018).
[47] LeoSat. 2018. Technical Overview. http://leosat.com/media/1114/leosat-technical-
overview.pdf. (2018).
[48] Xingqin Lin, Vijaya Yajnanarayana, Siva D Muruganathan, Shiwei Gao, Henrik
Asplund, Helka-Liina Maattanen, Mattias Bergstrom, Sebastian Euler, and Y-
P Eric Wang. 2018. The sky is not the limit: LTE for unmanned aerial vehicles.
IEEE Communications Magazine 56, 4 (2018), 204–210.
[49] Jiulong Ma, Xiaogang Qi, and Lifang Liu. 2017. An Effective Topology Design
Based on LEO/GEO Satellite Networks. In International Conference on Space
Information Network. Springer, 24–33.
[50] Gérard Maral. 1994. The ways to personal communications via satellite. Interna-
tional journal of satellite communications 12, 1 (1994), 3–12.
[51] marine.rutgers.edu. 2001. Keplerian Elements. https://marine.rutgers.edu/cool/
education/class/paul/orbits.html. (2001).
[52] Brendan D McKay and Nicholas C Wormald. 1990. Uniform generation of random
regular graphs of moderate degree. Journal of Algorithms 11, 1 (1990), 52–67.
[53] Oliver Montenbruck and Eberhard Gill. 2012. Satellite orbits: models, methods
and applications. Springer Science & Business Media.
[54] NetworkX developers. 2019. NetworkX. https://networkx.github.io/. (2019).
[55] OneWeb. 2018. How OneWeb is changing global communications. http://www.
oneweb.world/. (2018).
[56] Sumit Purohit, LB Holder, and George Chin. 2018. Temporal graph generation
based on a distribution of temporal motifs. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Workshop on Mining and Learning with Graphs.
[57] SatNet authors. 2019. Multi-motif for a 402 constellation with three 18° latitude
zones; maximum ISL length of 2,000 km. https://satnet-authors.github.io/cesium_
40_40_18deg_rings_2000km_isls.html. (2019).
[58] SatNet authors. 2019. Polar and inclined orbits with +Grid connectivity. https:
//satnet-authors.github.io/cesium_orbit_grid_demo.html. (2019).
[59] Yuval Shavitt. 2013. Network Motifs and Efficient Counting of Graphlets. https:
//tinyurl.com/y2ym2vxf. (2013).
[60] Afreen Siddiqi, Jason Mellein, and Olivier de Weck. 2005. Optimal reconfig-
urations for increasing capacity of communication satellite constellations. In
46th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials
Conference. 2065.
[61] Kawsu Sidibeh. 2008. Adaption of the IEEE 802.11 protocol for inter-satellite links in
LEO satellite networks. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Surrey (United Kingdom).
[62] Ankit Singla, Chi-Yao Hong, Lucian Popa, and P Brighten Godfrey. 2012. Jellyfish:
Networking data centers randomly. In USENIX NSDI.
[63] Berry Smutny, Hartmut Kaempfner, Gerd Muehlnikel, Uwe Sterr, Bernhard Wan-
dernoth, Frank Heine, Ulrich Hildebrand, Daniel Dallmann, Martin Reinhardt,
Axel Freier, et al. 2009. 5.6 Gbps optical intersatellite communication link. In
Free-Space Laser Communication Technologies XXI, Vol. 7199. International Society
for Optics and Photonics, 719906.
353

CoNEXT ’19, December 9–12, 2019, Orlando, FL, USA
D. Bhattacherjee and A. Singla
[64] Zoran Sodnik, Bernhard Furch, and Hanspeter Lutz. 2010. Optical intersatellite
communication. IEEE journal of selected topics in quantum electronics 16, 5 (2010),
1051–1057.
[65] Guanghua Song, Mengyuan Chao, Bowei Yang, and Yao Zheng. 2014. TLR: A
traffic-light-based intelligent routing strategy for NGEO satellite IP networks.
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 13, 6 (2014), 3380–3393.
[66] Beatriz Soret, Israel Leyva-Mayorga, and Petar Popovski. 2019. Inter-plane
satellite matching in dense LEO constellations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.08410
(2019).
[67] SpaceX FCC filing. 2017. SpaceX V-BAND NON-GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE
SYSTEM. https://tinyurl.com/kkskns4. (2017).
[68] SpaceX FCC update. 2018. SPACEX NON-GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE SYS-
TEM. https://licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment_key=1569860.
(2018).
[69] SpaceX Starlink. 2017. https://www.spacex.com/webcast. (2017).
[70] David E Sterling and John E Hatlelid. 1991. The IRIDIUM system-a revolution-
ary satellite communications system developed with innovative applications of
technology. In MILCOM 91-Conference record. IEEE, 436–440.
[71] Tarik Taleb, Daisuke Mashimo, Abbas Jamalipour, Nei Kato, and Yoshiaki Nemoto.
2008. Explicit load balancing technique for NGEO satellite IP networks with
on-board processing capabilities. IEEE/ACM ToN 17, 1 (2008), 281–293.
[72] Telesat. 2018. Telesat’s responses - Federal Communications Commission. http:
//licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment_key=1205775. (2018).
[73] Telesat. 2019. Satellite Services for Broadcast-Telecom-Corporate-Government-
Satellite Services in North America-South America-Asia-Europe-Ka. https://
www.telesat.com/. (2019).
[74] Asaf Valadarsky, Gal Shahaf, Michael Dinitz, and Michael Schapira. 2016. Xpander:
Towards optimal-performance datacenters. In ACM CoNEXT.
[75] Tanya Vladimirova and Kawsu Sidibeh. 2007. Inter-Satellite Links in LEO Con-
stellations of Small Satellites. http://www.ee.surrey.ac.uk/m_ssc/research/vlsi/
intersatellite.html. (2007).
[76] Markus Werner, Axel Jahn, Erich Lutz, and Axel Bottcher. 1995. Analysis of
system parameters for LEO/ICO-satellite communication networks. IEEE Journal
on Selected areas in Communications 13, 2 (1995), 371–381.
[77] ROBERT WIEDEMAN, ALLEN SALMASI, and Dennis Rouffet. 1992. Globalstar-
Mobile communications where ever you are. In 14th International Communication
Satellite Systems Conference and Exhibit. 1912.
[78] Wikipedia. 2014. "2014 est. PPP-adjusted GDP ($BN)" by Brookings Institution.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cities_by_GDP. (2014).
[79] Wikipedia. 2019. Thermosphere. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermosphere.
(2019).
[80] WonderNetwork. 2019. Global Ping Statistics. https://wondernetwork.com/pings.
(2019).
[81] Lloyd Wood. 2001. Internetworking with satellite constellations. Ph.D. Dissertation.
University of Surrey.
[82] William W Wu, Edward F Miller, Wilbur L Pritchard, and Raymond L Pickholtz.
1994. Mobile satellite communications. Proc. IEEE 82, 9 (1994), 1431–1448.
354

