STARPERF: Characterizing Network Performance
for Emerging Mega-Constellations
Zeqi Lai‡∗, Hewu Li¶‡∗, Jihao Li†∗
Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace‡, Department of Computer Science and Technology†, Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)∗, Beijing, China
zeqilai@tsinghua.edu.cn, lihewu@cernet.edu.cn, lijh19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—“Newspace” mega-constellations, such as Starlink
and OneWeb are gaining tremendous popularity, with the
promising potential to provide high-capacity and low-latency
communication globally. However, very little is known about
the architecture and performance of such emerging systems, the
workload they have to face, as well as the impact of topological
options on the attainable network performance.
This paper presents STARPERF, a mega-constellation per-
formance simulation platform that enables constellation man-
ufacturers and content providers to estimate and understand
the achievable performance under a variety of constellation
options. The proposed platform integrates two key techniques: (1)
performance simulation for mega-constellation, which captures
the impact of the inherent high mobility in satellite networks
and proﬁles the area-to-area attainable network performance;
(2) constellation scaling, which synthesizes various topological
options by scaling the space resource and enables exploration on
multiple operating conditions that can not be easily reproduced.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of STARPERF on understanding
and optimizing satellite networks, we leverage STARPERF to
evaluate and compare the performance of several state-of-the-
art low earth orbit (LEO) constellations and obtain insights
on optimizing the architectural design to improve area-to-area
network performance. Finally, to further show how applications
can beneﬁt from the proposed simulator, we propose an adaptive
relay selection algorithm that can intelligently choose the optimal
relay on cloud platforms and LEO satellites to achieve reduced
latency. Evaluation results show that by properly selecting a
relay in the satellite-cloud integrated infrastructure, end-to-end
communication latency can be reduced by up to 62% for typical
interactive trafﬁc.
Index Terms—performance modeling and analysis, satellite
constellations, network simulation, integrated satellite-terrestrial
networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Constructing “NewSpace” satellite networks (SN) is gaining
popularity in recent years, as SNs offer the promising potential
to provide low-latency, high-throughput global Internet con-
nectivity. We have witnessed a gold run to build constellations
consisting of a large number of low earth orbit (LEO) satellites,
namely “mega-constellations”, with players like OneWeb [7],
Amazon [1] and SpaceX [12] entering the market. The latter
one, which is the largest commercial satellite constellation op-
erator in the world since January 2020, is actively constructing
¶Hewu Li is the corresponding author.
the Starlink constellation that consists of thousands of mass-
produced small satellites in LEO, and will be initially available
to customers in Canada and in the northern United States in
2020, with additional service expansion to other areas of the
world throughout 2021 [11].
Fundamentally, mega-constellations facilitate the Internet
by extending the connectivity of existing terrestrial networks
(i.e., integrated satellite-terrestrial networks), and breaking the
inherently physical constraints in today’s Internet deployment.
First, SNs expand the Internet coverage at broadband speeds to
the remote area where access might be unreliable, expensive,
or completely unavailable. Second, constellations with thou-
sands of satellites working in LEO enable new opportunities
for constructing a network in space to provide low-latency
communication. Modern LEO satellites can equip optical inter-
satellite links (ISLs) for inter-satellite communication. In the
free-space, data packets can propagate in the speed of light
in vacuum, which is much faster than that in the terrestrial
ﬁber. Therefore the latency penalty in space might possibly
be lowered by avoiding long-distance and meandering ﬁber
routes. Finally, SNs are also expected to enhance the network
throughput, since the rapid evolution of on-board technology
and the increase in power generation have led to the evolution
of high-bitrate satellite [39], which can provide tens and even
hundreds of Gbps data rate.
While above exciting prospects depict a blooming picture of
the future integrated satellite-terrestrial networks, the communi-
ty still has very limited understanding of the topological charac-
teristic and the attainable network performance of modern mega-
constellations. Quantitatively proﬁling mega-constellations is
meaningful for designing, using, and optimizing SNs, but it also
faces a series of practical challenges: (i) currently emerging
satellite constellations such as Starlink are still under heavy
development, and the deployment of satellites is costly and
time-consuming. It is thus difﬁcult to directly measure the
network performance from a completely deployed constellation
system; (ii) SNs are fundamentally different from terrestrial
networks. Emerging satellite networks inherently expose two
particular features: only relatively nearby satellites can connect
to each other due to the limited range of ISLs, and satellites are
moving in high-speed with respect to ground stations and each
other [19]. Such particular features make it difﬁcult for existing
network proﬁling methodologies to accurately characterize the
978-1-7281-6992-7/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

mega-constellations. Several existing works tried to model and
analyze the characteristic of novel constellations but they mostly
focus on modeling the system capacity under different physical
layer payload decision [21], [43], which ignores the impact of
using different constellation options or network policies on the
user-perceived network performance.
In this paper we present the design and implementation
of STARPERF, a performance simulation platform that helps
constellation manufacturers and content providers to estimate
and understand the achievable performance under a variety
of constellation options. The two key techniques behind
the proposed platform are: (1) performance simulation for
mega-constellation, which captures the impact of the inherent
high mobility in satellite networks and proﬁles the area-to-
area attainable network performance; and (2) constellation
scaling, which synthesizes various topological options by
scaling the architectural capability (e.g., number of satellite,
link availability and capacity), and enables the exploration on
multiple operating conditions that can not be easily reproduced.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of STARPERF on under-
standing and optimizing satellite networks, we then leverage
STARPERF to evaluate and compare the performance of three
state-of-the-art LEO constellations: Starlink, OneWeb and
TeleSat, and perform what-if analysis, such as: what is the
achievable latency between hosts located in London and
NewYork respectively, if high-bitrate ISLs are fully deployed?
The benchmark reveals a number of insights on using and
optimizing existing mega-constellations like: emerging mega-
constellations indeed offer low-latency opportunities for long-
distance communications if ISLs are deployed, especially for
communications between different continents. The constellation
topology should be well designed to avoid high latency
variation, as satellites move in high-speed and the path length
in space is changing over time. The orbital decision and the
scale of satellites can also signiﬁcantly affect the resilience of
the constellation.
Finally, to further show how applications or content providers
can beneﬁt from the proposed simulation platform, we il-
lustrate STARPERF’s ability on assisting a future satellite-
cloud integrated infrastructure that offers low-latency relay for
delay-sensitive real-time communications (RTC). STARPERF
helps to intelligently choose the optimal relay located on
either cloud platform or satellite to improve the quality of
RTC. Evaluation results show that by properly selecting a
relay in the satellite-cloud integrated infrastructure, end-to-end
communication latency can be reduced by up to 62% for typical
interactive trafﬁc.
Conclusionally, this paper makes three key contributions:
• Presenting STARPERF, a simulation platform for proﬁl-
ing and understanding the network performance of mega-
constellations under a diversity of architectural options and
network policies. (§III)
• Leveraging STARPERF to benchmark three state-of-the-art
mega-constellations and their possible topological extension,
and highlighting insights on optimizing constellation designs
to improve network performance. (§IV)

 
""

	   !

  "
traceroute
		  
! 



 

	

	
	
Fig. 1: The low-latency opportunity enabled by LEO satel-
lite constellations. (I): the terrestrial route measured by
traceroute; (II): route over Starlink constellation, with
lower latency as it avoids long and meandering ﬁber routes.
• Quantifying the potential beneﬁts of a satellite-cloud in-
tegrated infrastructure, and proposing a low-latency relay
selection algorithm that can effectively reduce the latency
of interactive video applications. (§V)
The implementation of STARPERF is mainly in Python
and the code is open source1. To the best of our knowledge,
STARPERF is the ﬁrst open-source simulator for characterizing
the network performance of emerging mega-constellations
under various constellation options and network policies.
Moreover, today’s mega-constellations like Starlink are still
evolving rapidly. As our future work, we will keep upgrading
STARPERF to follow latest updates on Starlink and other
emerging mega-constellations.
II. WHY PROFILING SATELLITE NETWORKS IS IMPORTANT?
A. Mega-constellations bring new opportunities for global low-
latency and high-throughput communication.
Quick primer for satellite networks: Typically, a satellite
network (SN) built upon mega-constellations contains two
primary components: (1) the space section which includes a
large group of low-ﬂying satellites running on low earth orbits
(LEO), interconnected by inter-satellite links (ISLs); and (2)
the terrestrial section that typically consists of a number of
ground stations (GSes), which establish bidirectional satellite-
to-ground links (SGLs) to connect the constellation in space.
New opportunities enabled by emerging constellations:
The integration of satellite networks and the terrestrial Internet
as a whole offers great new opportunities for improving the user-
perceived network performance, which is not limited to broader
Internet access. The rapid evolution of on-board technology
has led to the development of the high-throughput satellites
(HTS) [39], which promises to provide tens and even hundreds
of Gbps transmission rate.
In addition to wider coverage and higher network capacity,
mega-constellations also enables a promising potential for
low-latency Internet communications. ISLs between satellites
can use free-space lasers as the physical layer payload to
communicate at the speed of light in a vacuum. Therefore, long-
distance communications may attain lower latency via routing
1https://github.com/SpaceNetLab/StarPerf Simulator
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

over LEO constellations [31]. Moreover, free-space mega-
constellation breaks the geographical routing constraints that
prolongs terrestrial paths. Figure 1 plots an example, showing
the opportunity of leveraging inter-satellite links to reduce
intercontinental communication latency. The traceroute
result shows that current network deployments and routing
policies forward data from Beijing to Sydney via Los Angeles
by default. Such intercontinental detour incurs more hops and
possibly larger delay than the shorter path built upon mega-
constellations in space.
B. Understanding satellite networks is challenging.
While SNs offer promising opportunities on improving
network performance, it is very challenging to understand
SNs’ architecture, network performance and the impact of
various design options (e.g., topological or routing potions).
First, SNs have the inherent “high mobility” property that
differs from the terrestrial network, resulting in dynamic
network topology and intermittent connectivity. In wired
networks, network nodes such as routers and switches are
typically static. Even in terrestrial Wi-Fi or cellular networks,
mobile nodes (e.g., mobile phones or vehicles) are not moving
so fast as satellites. In SNs, potential network nodes are moving
in high speed with respect to the Earth and other satellites,
and ISLs are limited by range. Only those relatively nearby
satellites can be connected, and thus routes over SNs should
be updated timely to adapt the dynamic connectivity.
Second, the real deployment for mega-constellations are
signiﬁcantly cost-intensive and time-consuming, and thus it
is very difﬁcult to directly measure the performance of a
fully deployed constellation system. Finally, the design of
SN consists of a large number of architectural and routing
options. Such diversity on design options makes it meaningful
but difﬁcult to estimate and understand the impact of various
options on the corresponding network performance.
C. Proﬁling mega-constellations is of signiﬁcant importance.
Summarily, when designing, operating and using emerging
mega-constellations, it is often important and useful to proﬁle
the network performance of a constellation, speciﬁed by both
the architectural options and network policies (e.g., routing
scheme). Therefore, the goal of this paper is to design and
implement such a simulation platform to model, analyze and
understand the network performance and design trade-space
of emerging mega-constellations. The usage of our platform
includes: (i) guiding constellation operators to attain a function
of the network capacity of the constellation topology. Such
a function can help to understand and optimize the design
of constellations; (ii) guiding content providers who want to
deploy their contents upon LEO satellites to provide low-latency
services globally. Next we present the details of such a platform,
STARPERF.
III. THE STARPERF PLATFORM
A. STARPERF overview.
System overview. Figure 2 plots the overview of our
STARPERF platform. The STARPERF platform takes network
  













!



			


	


	

Fig. 2: The overview and workﬂow of STARPERF.
topology, network policy and trafﬁc pattern as the platform
input. The input of STARPERF describes the composition and
scale of the constellation, how satellites are connected to each
other and ground stations, and how user requests are scheduled
and forwarded over satellites. The main components inside
STARPERF is a suit of models which quantitatively describe a
LEO satellite constellation together with its performance esti-
mation. At runtime, STARPERF loads the input and calculates
the performance output based on the built-in models.
Collectively, STARPERF includes two key techniques: (1)
performance simulation for mega-constellation, which captures
the impact of inherent high mobility in satellite networks
and proﬁles the area-to-area attainable network performance;
(2) resource scaling, which synthesizes various constellation
topologies and network policies by scaling the space resource
(e.g., number of satellite, link availability and capacity), and
enables exploring multiple operating conditions that can not
be easily reproduced.
Runtime workﬂow. To evaluate a satellite constellation by
STARPERF, ﬁrst the user speciﬁes the constellation options
and network policy (e.g., trafﬁc scheduling or routing strategy),
together with a conﬁgured trafﬁc pattern. The input is then
loaded by the STARPERF platform and is used to generate
a simulated satellite network according to the built-in model
inside the platform. The trafﬁc pattern is then loaded and
applied in the network. Performance metrics such as network
latencies are measured and ﬁnally used to compute and quantify
the network performance.
B. Characterizing network topology.
Our STARPERF platform proﬁles the network topology of a
LEO satellite constellation by modeling three primary aspects:
(1) orbit property; (2) ground station distribution; and (3) link
type and connectivity among satellites.
Orbit and constellation elements. The design option for
constellation orbit can signiﬁcantly affect the coverage and
route stability in SNs. STARPERF leverages ﬁve primary con-
tinuous parameters to describe the orbit design: (1) Inclination
(Inc), which is the angle between an orbit and the Equator
as the satellite travels northward. The value of Inclination
for polar orbits is 90◦; (2) Altitude(Alt), which is measured
over sea level and it determines the orbital velocity. Recent
constellations typically consist of low-ﬂying satellites with an
altitude of 2,000 km or less; (3) Orbit phase shifts(OPS), which
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TABLE I: Design options for LEO mega-constellations.
Decision
Options and range of values
Inclination
inclination of orbit i (Inci)
Altitude
altitude of orbit i (Alti)
Phase shift
phase shift of orbit i (Phai)
# of orbit
total number of orbits (Numorb)
# of satellite
number of satellites in ith orbit (SatNi)
# of GS
total number of ground stations
Location of GS
location distribution of GS
Link band
band range: S/X/Ku/Ka/optical
Link type
type range: bent-pipe, circuit- or packet-
switched
capture the relative placement of satellites in a constellation.
The orbit phase offset between orbital planes indicates when
satellites in consecutive orbits cross the equator; (4) Number of
orbits(NoO); and (5) Number of satellites(NoS) in each orbit.
Link options. The link options include both the band
allocation and payload type of inter-satellite and satellite-to-
ground links. The link band is very critical to the network
performance, as the link data rate largely depends on the band
selected. For instance, data rate higher than 512Mbps is only
doable if high bands (like Ka- or higher) are used. STARPERF
describes the link type between arbitrary two nodes in the
SN as one option selected form S-band, X-band, Ku-band,
Ka-band or optical. In addition, the payload type refers to the
type of architecture implemented, which includes bent-pipe,
circuit-switched or packet-switched.
Satellite connectivity pattern. Satellites connect to GSes
and other satellites. The connectivities are mainly limited by
the visibility and power supplement, as well as the ability to
quickly establish links between fast-moving satellites via radio
or laser alignment. The approach of establishing connectivities
in satellite constellation also signiﬁcantly affects the network
performance, as it determines the basic network topology. In
particular, existing non-GEO constellations like Iridium use a
grid-like approach for their ISLs. Recently works have proposed
a Grid+ [19] connectivity pattern, in which each satellite has
four bi-directional ISLs with its nearby neighbors, two in
the same orbit, and other two with immediate neighbors in
the 2 adjacent orbits. STARPERF supports grid and Grid+
connectivity pattern by default, and also allows customized
connectivity design as the platform input.
Table I summarizes the design options for LEO mega-
constellations supported by the STARPERF platform.
C. Options for routing strategy.
The network performance over SNs is affected not only
by the design of constellation, but also by the network
policies running on SNs. In order to accommodate all expected
customers, a LEO satellite network has to determine how
to optimally (if possible) route and forward demand trafﬁc.
Typically, we deﬁne such routing and forwarding strategies
as the routing policy, which will signiﬁcantly affect the path
performance including latency, throughput, reachability and
resilience in SNs.
By default, STARPERF models two kinds of routing strate-
gies: (1) distributed routing strategies, such as OSPF and
GPSR [36] which leverage the local information obtained
on each node (i.e., satellite) to calculate the routing table
(e.g., using djisktra); and (2) centralized routing strategies, like
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) [31], [35].
D. Characterizing network performance.
STARPERF characterizes three key performance metrics of a
certain constellation system: 1) Coverage rate, which indicates
the available range covered by satellites; (2) Latency, which is
deﬁned as the delay of sending a small packet from a source to
its destination via satellites; and (3) Throughput, showing the
ability of delivering content via the LEO constellation. Since
the ultimate goal of a mega LEO constellation is to provide
better Internet accessibility and communication quality, these
metrics can quantify the main network aspects concerned by
both constellation designers and content providers who aim to
deploy on-satellite contents.
Further, to model the network performance geographically,
STARPERF builds a grid systems upon the Earth surface for
modeling and analyzing geographic information to measure
the coverage, latency and throughput. The grid system used in
STARPERF buckets user requests and satellites into hexagonal
areas based on H3 [5]. STARPERF discretizes the Earth surface
into hexagonal areas for several reasons: (1) Satellites in LEO
are often in high-speed motion, and hexagons minimize the
quantization error introduced when satellites moves in high
speed. (2) Hexagons have good scalability, since the size of a
hexagon can be dynamically adjusted by setting its resolution.
A higher resolution indicates a smaller hexagon. (3) It is easy
to use hexagonal areas to approximate radiuses, since they
well ﬁt the circle coverage of satellites. Using the hexagonal
hierarchical grid system, STARPERF groups a set of nearby
locations into a hexagonal area, and maps a certain location
(speciﬁed by its latitude and longitude) to a 64-bit area index.
We denote AR
i as the ith area in STARPERF, under a certain
resolution R, and the total number of hexagonal area is denoted
as NumR
area. Next we formulate the network performance upon
the grid system.
Coverage. Given a LEO constellation containing a number
of satellites in high speed motion, the coverage is time-varying
and depends on the constellation topology. Let cit denote a
binary parameter and is set to true if area AR
i
is covered
by the satellite constellation. We then deﬁne the coverage
of the constellation in slot t as the fraction of covered area:
Numsat
i=1
cit
Numarea . Thus, the coverage rate of constellation C over
a period T can be formulated as CRC
T :
CRC
T = (
T
t=1
Numarea
i=1
cit
Numarea
)/T
(1)
The above equation quantiﬁes the fraction of covered area.
However, many areas on the Earth are built on ocean and
mountains with rare communication requirements. To model
the ability of providing services for “necessary” areas, we use
binary parameter hit to indicate whether there is at least one
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

communication request in ith area in t time slot. Then the
hotspot coverage rate can be formulated as:
HCRC
T = (
T

t=1
Numarea
i=1
cit ∗hit
Numarea
i=1
hit
)/T
(2)
Equation 2 captures the coverage rate of hotspot areas, and
a higher value of HCRC
T indicates better satellite accessibility
of the constellation during the period T.
Area-to-area latency. STARPERF focuses on the attainable
latency via routing over SNs, which is mainly constrained
by the network topology and the speed of light. Therefore,
in the design of STARPERF we refrain other impacts on the
latency (e.g., packet processing time, encoding/decoding time)
and assume the latency here is dominated by the propagation
latency. Moreover, note that the prior work [38] has shown
that Internet latencies to any particular data center are similar
from users in the similar location. Users in the same area have
nearby locations and similar distance from the user terminals
to the connected LEO satellite. Hence we assume that the
end-to-end delays via the LEO constellation are similar for the
same area pair, and we do not add an excessive constraint on
latencies of all paths of the same area pair. STARPERF then
formulates the area-to-area latency from ith area to jth area
in slot t as:
Lij = fL(Tpl, RS, t)
(3)
where Tpl is the network topology of the LEO constellation
and RS is the routing strategy used to route packets from
the source area to the destination area. Once the area-to-area
path is determined by the given routing strategy, the latency is
estimated as the length of the path divided by the 2c/3, where
c is the light speed in space. The value of area-to-area latency
suggests the ability of providing low latency communication
of a LEO constellation, which is useful for delay-sensitive
interactive applications, as we will show in later sections.
Area-to-area throughput. Another important performance
metric is the area-to-area throughput. The rapid evolution of
on-board technology and an increase in power generation led to
the development of high-throughput satellites, which are able to
provide tens and even hundreds of Gbps bandwidth. Therefore,
the area-to-area throughput which indicates the achievable
rate of successful data delivery between two areas over the
SN, is critical for content providers who leverage satellites
to distribute important content in real time. Particularly, we
deﬁne the area-to-area throughput Bij between area i and j as
the total throughput of all paths that have the similar latency
with the shortest path. Therefore, Bij quantiﬁes the ability of
a certain constellation topology to deliver contents from i to
j by routing trafﬁc without congestion and with low latency.
The function of Bij is denoted as:
Bij = fB(Tpl, RS, t, β)
(4)
where Tpl and RS are the network topology and routing
strategy respectively. β is a parameter to represent the latency
requirement [30]. Calculating the area-to-area throughput
provided by a certain constellation design follows the next
stages. First, building a network with users in the source and
destination areas, and all visible satellites. Second, running the
routing algorithm to obtain the shortest path which consists of
a set of sequential ISLs and satellite-to-ground links. Third,
calculating the latency of the shortest path, denoted as Dmin.
Then identify all similar paths with the same source and
destination that have latency < β ∗Dmin. Finally, constructing
a sub-network that includes all those similar paths and compute
the max-ﬂow from the source to the destination.
Resilience. Resilience indicates the ability of mega-
constellations to provide and maintain an acceptable level of
service in the face of faults and challenges to normal operation.
When using SNs to extend terrestrial networks and support
Internet service, constellation operators have to consider the
vulnerabilities and resilience of the proposed constellations.
The constellation topology should be reasonably designed
to provide resilient and affordable capabilities to preserve
stable connectivity in space. STARPERF uses the betweenness
centrality [2] from graph theory to quantify the resilience of
a constellation. Betweenness is a metric that describes the
centrality in a graph based on shortest paths, and it is widely
used in telecommunications networks, e.g., a node with higher
betweenness centrality would have more trafﬁc passing through
that node. Moreover, a node with a high betweenness centrality
may also be a potential bottleneck node, since the failure of
this node will affect all ﬂows relying on it. Speciﬁcally, the
betweenness of a satellite sat which works as a node in the
SN is calculated as:
betweenness(sat) =

s̸=d̸=sat
psd(sat)
psd
(5)
where psd is the total number of the shortest paths from
source s to destination d in the SN, and psd(sat) is the number
of those paths that pass through sat.
E. Characterizing user requests.
Typically, in satellite network, user handsets can connect to
satellites directly (e.g., like Iridium) or connect by very-small-
aperture terminal (VSAT), which is a two-way satellite ground
station with a small dish antenna. Emerging constellation
systems like Starlink claim that it will be linked to ﬂat user
terminals in the size of a pizza box which will have phased array
antennas and track the satellites. The terminals can be mounted
anywhere, as long as they can observe the sky. Therefore,
STARPERF assumes each end user can connect to satellites
directly or connect via a pre-purchased VSAT, if the user is in
the sight of view of the satellites.
User requests are formulated as a trafﬁc matrix in the
grid system. Let Rijt denote a transfer task that requires
to send Rijt bytes data from ith area to jth area in slot
t. Thus Rijt describes the trafﬁc distribution between different
areas. In particular, the trafﬁc distribution can be estimated by
the population of different cities, or generated according to
dedicated applications.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

)UTYZKRRGZOUT
)UTLOM[XGZOUT
Constellation
decision
Network
policy
Traffic
pattern
Scaling
requirement
4KZ]UXQ
9OS[RGZUX
Network
Generator
Traffic Generator
Orbit
Analysis
Decision scaling
and enumeration
apply
load
6KXLUXSGTIK
'YYKYYSKTZ
Benefit
computation
Performance
model
Requirement
Fig. 3: Implementation of STARPERF. STARPERF loads con-
ﬁguration ﬁles which speciﬁc the key parameters of mega-
constellation. STARPERF then simulates the network topology,
and applies user trafﬁc on it to calculate network performance.
F. Constellation scaling.
Constructing and deploying mega-constellations is cost-
intensive and time-consuming. Therefore, in addition to study
on a certain constellation pattern, it is meaningful but difﬁcult to
explore the impact of various architectural design decisions on
the achievable network performance. The STARPERF platform
has the capability of automatically scaling and enumerating
all the possible design options outlined in previous sections.
For example, the user can increase the number of satellites
in the constellation, or enable/disable ISLs, by tuning the
conﬁguration ﬁles of STARPERF. All possible topologies and
routing policies can be automatically enumerated and evaluated
using this platform, by iterating the Cartesian product of all
options in the trade-space listed in Table I.
G. Implementation of STARPERF platform.
Figure 3 plots the key components in the implementation
of STARPERF. The STARPERF platform loads input manifest
which describes network topology, ﬂow scheduling policy,
and trafﬁc pattern to generate a satellite network graph.
The constellation simulation is partially implemented based
on third-party orbit analysis tools (e.g., STK [8]), which
help to simulate the movement of satellites over time. For
each constellation, STARPERF calculates the constellation
decisions and orbit parameters. Once all the nodes of the
network have been loaded and scaled to the desired size, user
trafﬁcs are generated and applied to the network and ﬁnally
STARPERF calculates the corresponding network performance.
As emerging constellations like Starlink are still under heavy
deployment and it is difﬁcult to collect the real number of
its users, we follow the approach used in [21] to estimate the
geo-distributed user requests, based on the real population in
different areas. Speciﬁcally, the user requests are generated
according to the Gridded Population of the World v4 dataset [4].
We assume that a satellite network operator will capture about
5% of the total Internet trafﬁc of each area, and each user in
an area has a 500Kbps data rate requirement.
IV. BENCHMARKING “NEWSPACE” CONSTELLATIONS
In this section we demonstrate the effectiveness of STARPER-
F on characterizing and understanding emerging state-of-the-art
LEO mega-constellation systems.
TABLE II: Primary constellation parameters for three state-of-
the-art mega-constellation systems in our benchmark.
Design
Options
Starlink
(Phase I)
OneWeb
TeleSat
(Polar/Inclined)
Inclination
53◦
87.9◦
99.5◦/37.4◦
Altitude
550km
1200km
1000km/1200km
Phase shift
1
0
0/0
# of orbit
24
18
6/5
# of satellites
66
40
12/10
A. Benchmarking constellation systems by STARPERF.
Benchmark setup. In order to understand the architecture
and performance of current mega-constellations, we leverage
STARPERF to benchmark three state-of-the-art commercial
mega-constellations, Starlink [12], OneWeb [7] and Tele-
Sat [14]. In addition, we also scale the topological resource of
each constellation (e.g., enabling ISLs) to exploit the impact
of diverse design options on the network performance. In
each experiment we simulate a three-day duration for mega-
constellations to get the result.
Table II shows the primary constellation parameters of the
mega-constellation selected in the benchmark. Starlink Ku +
Ka constellation comprises 1584 satellites that are distributed
across several sets of orbits. Similarly, OneWeb Ku + Ka-band
constellation comprises 720 satellites in 18 circular orbital
planes at an altitude of about 1200km, each plane inclined at
88◦. TeleSat is a constellation working in Ka-band, and it plans
to comprise about 120 satellites ﬂying in two groups of orbits:
polar orbits and inclined orbits. The former group including six
circular orbital planes will be at an altitude of about 1000km
and 99.5◦inclination. For each orbital plane, there will be at
least 12 satellites. The latter group contains about 5 orbital
planes in an altitude of about 1200km and 37.4◦inclination.
There are about 10 satellites in each orbital plane.
Results of coverage. We ﬁrst examine the coverage of
different constellations. First, the coverage (as deﬁned in
Equation (1)) of Starlink, OneWeb and TeleSat are 87%, 100%
and 100% respectively. OneWeb and TeleSat achieve higher
coverage rate as their constellation contains Polar orbits that
extend the connectivities in polar region. Second, since one of
the primary goal of building SNs is to connect key population
centers with satellite paths that run close to the great circle
route, we then explore coverage for cities with high population
density. Figure 4 depicts the hot coverage rate of different
constellations, aggregated by latitude and longitude respectively.
The global population distribution is extracted from the Gridded
Population of the World (GPW) version 4 [4]. We calculate
the hot coverage rate of various constellation patterns. An area
with population higher than the threshold is marked as “hot”
area, and is eager to be covered by satellites. As shown in
Figure 4, all constellations can cover large population centers
(population > 57 million). Finally, Figure 5 shows the number
of satellites in line of sight per million population, aggregated
by latitude or longitude respectively. This metric indicates the
geo-distributed coverage rate in different areas, and Starlink has
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

0
20
40
60
80
100
Popolation threshold (million)
0.9
0.95
1
Hot coverage (%)
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
Fig. 4: Hot coverage rate.
-50
0
50
latitude (°)
0
200
400
600
# of satellite / m
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
-100
0
100
longtitude (°)
0
20
40
# of satellite / m
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
Fig. 5: Coverage aggregated by latitude and longitude respectively.
the largest number of satellites per million population around
the -45◦latitude band.
Results of latency. We then examine the latency distribution
obtained in different constellations. Figure 6 plots the area-
to-area latency via various constellation patterns among four
big cities located in four continents. More detailed results
containing other “hot areas” can be found in our technical
report [13]. The route is calculated by Dijkstra’s algorithm
in every second, using link latency as the network metric to
attain the path with shortest latency in every second. Several
interesting ﬁndings can be observed from the results: (i)
emerging mega-constellations can provide routes with lower
latency for long-distance inter-continent communication, as
compared to the terrestrial Internet. Our experiments show that
such a latency reduction is caused by the higher transmission
speed in free-space laser, and by avoiding transmission over
meandering path (example in Figure 1); (ii) routes over SNs
suffer from high latency variation. The root cause for such
high variations is three-fold. First, as satellites move in high-
speed, the physical distance between two nodes is elongated
and shorten over time, resulting the latency change. Second,
the variation is highly affected by the topology design of the
constellation. An even constellation pattern like Starlink can
obtain lower latency jitter as compared to TeleSat. Finally,
routing packets via satellites that ﬂy in different directions
can also involve additional latency. For example, satellites in
Starlink can be divided into two groups based on their direction:
one runs in the south-west to north-east direction, and the
other group runs in the north-west to south-east direction. The
total path latency is prolonged if the source and destination
connect to satellites in different direction group. Such a ﬁnding
indicates an important suggestion for the topological design of
constellation: a constellation can attain low latency and low
latency variation, if both the source and destination area are
covered by satellites working in the same direction, during the
communication period.
Note that the previous study in [31] also performed an
estimation on the round trip time between big cities via the
Starlink constellation. The latency estimated here by STARPERF
is slightly lower than the results in [31]. This is because in the
prior work, latencies are estimated based on SpaceX’s original
plans with satellites orbiting at an altitude of about 1100km.
Latency results calculated by STARPERF is based on the latest
FCC, revised in November 2018 by SpaceX, and the revised
constellation lowers the altitude of satellites from 1100km to
550km, resulting in reduced propagation latency. Moreover,
if we adjust the constellation options to the original Starlink
phase, latency results aligned to [31] can be obtained.
Results of throughput. The result of area-to-area achievable
throughput is jointly affected by the constellation topology,
routing scheme and the user trafﬁc. Figure 7 shows the area-to-
area throughput between four populated areas under different
constellation patterns. In this experiment we use β = 1.1
and the capacity of ISLs are set to about 5Gbps according
to [21]. β = 1.1 indicates that all paths with latency less than
1.1× delay of the shortest path can be used for transferring
data of the same user demand. On average, Starlink, OneWeb
and TeleSat can provide 11.3Gbps, 10.7Gbps and 6.1Gbps
maximum throughput respectively. As the uniform architectural
design of Starlink enables better ﬂexibility to accommodate
trafﬁc on alternative low-latency paths, on average Starlink
achieves the highest area-to-area throughput as compared to
other constellations, if ISLs are enable.
Results of resilience. Finally, we explore the resilience
under different constellation designs. Figure 8 plots the
cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the betweenness
which quantify the resilience of the constellation. Interestingly,
since satellites in Starlink are distributed evenly, all nodes have
similar betweenness in Starlink, indicating a good resilience that
Starlink can provide and maintain data forwarding in the face
of node or link failure. TeleSat obtains the highest betweenness
among the three constellations, showing that some nodes in
TeleSat have much higher centrality than others. Constellation
operator should develop and deploy error resilience techniques
for those nodes with high centrality to avoid service suspend.
B. Insights obtained.
Summarily, above benchmark results indicate several insights
for optimizing the performance of modern satellite networks,
as listed below.
• (i) Emerging mega-constellations indeed offer low-latency
opportunities for long-distance communications if ISLs are
deployed, especially for communications between different
continents. The attainable network performance can be
signiﬁcantly affected by the concrete constellation design.
Satellites working on lower orbits may provide lower latency
due to the shortened route length. However, lower orbits are
also faster with a higher orbital velocity, which is more likely
to cause intermittent network connectivity and higher jitter.
Thus, the constellation design and network policies should
be jointly optimized to support various upper applications.
• (ii) The orbital decision and the scale of satellites can
signiﬁcantly affect the resilience of the constellation. An
even constellation design (e.g., Starlink) has more nodes with
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Latency (ms)
0
0.5
1
CDF
NewYork<-->Beijing
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
0
10
20
30
Latency (ms)
0
0.5
1
CDF
London<-->Beijing
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
0
10
20
30
Latency (ms)
0
0.5
1
CDF
Beijing<-->Sydney
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
0
10
20
30
40
50
Latency (ms)
0
0.5
1
CDF
NewYork<-->London
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
0
20
40
60
80
100
Latency (ms)
0
0.5
1
CDF
Sydney<-->NewYork
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
0
10
20
30
40
Latency (ms)
0
0.5
1
CDF
London<-->Sydney
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
Fig. 6: Area-to-area attainable latency on various mega-constellations. The area-to-area path is calculated by the shortest path
identiﬁcation algorithm, using the number of hops as the routing metric.
NY<->BJ
LD<->BJ
BJ<->SN
NY<->LD
SN<->NY
LD<->SN
0
10
20
Throughput(Gbps)
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
Fig. 7: Throughput obtained under different constellations.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Betweenness
0
0.5
1
CDF
 
StarLink
OneWeb
Telesat
Fig. 8: Resilience of various constellation patterns.
lower betweenness in the constructed network, indicating
that failures occur on these nodes may have smaller impact
on SN trafﬁc. To guarantee good network resilience and keep
stable connections, it is recommended to keep a balanced
constellation architecture with an evenly coverage.
V. USE CASE: LOW-LATENCY RELAY SELECTION IN SPACE
Above benchmark has evaluated the usefulness of STARPERF
on characterizing and understanding mega-constellations. In
this section, a use case study is conducted to further show how
content providers can use STARPERF to improve their services.
A. Relay selection problem in real-time communication.
Low-latency requirement in real-time communication.
Over the last several years, we have seen a dramatic rise
in Internet-based Real-Time Communication (RTC), especially
for long-distance internal video-conferencing. The key differ-
ence between RTC and on-demand video streaming is the
interactivity, which requires ultra-low latency and jitter.
 
 
	 



 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9: The relay selection problem in typical real-time
communication systems. STARPERF proﬁles the beneﬁt of
leveraging LEO satellites to build communication paths, which
can be used for optimizing the relay selection process.
A classic solution to reduce communication latency (es-
pecial for long-distance cross ASes communication) is relay
selection [34], [47] which uses an intermediate server to relay
RTC trafﬁc. Choosing a relay server for a RTC session (e.g.,
video-conferencing) typically contains two key stages: (1) ﬁnd
a relay server which is “good” enough for all attendees (i.e.,
the average attendee-to-relay latency is minimum); (2) each
attendee communicates to each other via the relay server.
In particular, the relay server is typically built upon cloud
infrastructures such as Amazon AWS and Azure. However, as
we have analyzed in section IV, the terrestrial routing path may
suffer additional delay due to the physical constrains, especially
in inter-ASes scenarios. Considering the potential low-latency
property enabled by LEO satellites, we leverage STARPERF to
design an intelligent star relay selection mechanism to improve
the RTC communication quality.
Problem formulation for relay selection in RTC applica-
tions. The goal of the relay selection problem is to allocate
each session with a set of attendees to a particular relay option.
As shown in Figure 9, a session can: (1) use direct connection
in WAN, without relaying on a server; (2) use a selected server
or servers as relay nodes located in cloud infrastructures. Let
Sess denote the RTC session set for optimization, and we
denote Relay as the set of all possible relay options. Let
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 




	 

 
 

  

  
   	
	  

    
 
   
  	
 
	
	
 
  
	 
 	 
 
 

Fig. 10: Our relay selection approach in the integrated network.
s ∈Sess and r ∈Relay denote a speciﬁc RTC session and
relay selection respectively. Further, we denote D(s, r) as the
estimated interactive latency for session s relaying on relay
option r. In addition, we assume that all decisions on relay
server selection are independent to each other, and thus the
latency of a certain session is not affected by relay selections
calculated for other RTC sessions.
Accordingly, the goal of the relay selection problem is to
ﬁnd the optimal relay option for every session s ∈Sess. We
denote allocate: Sess →Relay as the allocation decision
and r = allocate(s) indicates to allocate relay r to session s.
Therefore, our goal is to calculate the allocation that minimizes
the average latency among all sessions:
arg min(

s∈Sess D(s, allocate(s))
|Sess|
)
(6)
B. Our approach in the satellite-cloud integrated architecture.
The key intuition behind our approach is the insight we
identiﬁed in previous section that leveraging satellites running
on low earth orbit can potentially build a low-latency path for
long-distance communication. This insight extends the possible
set of relay options and offers new opportunity in improving
real-time communications, as shown in Figure 9.
Accordingly, we propose a Low-latency Satellite-Cloud
Relay Selection (SCRS) algorithm that explores in optimal
relay option in both terrestrial cloud computing platforms
and mega-constellations in space. Essentially, SCRS is an
measurement-based exploration approach that exploits historical
performance information to predict and select the low-latency
relay. Figure 10 depicts the key operating process of SCRS.
In a nutshell the logical stages in SCRS include:
• Periodically, each attendee explicitly probes the latency
to every relay options. The performance information for
satellite relays are proﬁled by STARPERF. Historical path
performance information are then gathered and saved in the
database on the session controller.
• When initializing a RTC session for a set of attendees, the
session controller explores historical performance informa-
tion to calculate the optimal relay option.
• Establishing the RTC session for all attendees based on the
relay server(s) selected. Performance feedback of the RTC
session is sent to the session control server.
C. Numeric results.
To show the effectiveness of improving RTC quality by
comprehensively utilizing relays in the satellite-cloud integrated
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
Frame latency (ms)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CDF
SCRS(Beijing<-->NewYork)
SCRS(Sydney<-->Beijing)
SCRS(NewYork<-->Sydney)
Cloud-Only(Beijing<-->NewYork)
Cloud-Only(Sydney<-->Beijing)
Cloud-Only(NewYork<-->Sydney)

Fig. 11: Interactive latency improvement by STARPERF.
infrastructure, we perform data-driven simulations based on
network traces measured from real cloud platforms and
STARPERF.
Methodology. To simulate an interactive RTC session, we
extend WebRTC [15], which is an open-source framework that
enables peer-to-peer real-time video and audio communication,
to support communication via a relay server. Then we run
the WebRTC application on two laptops, and both of them
are connected to a controlled relay server. We use tc [6] to
tune the link quality between the relay server and the laptop,
and simulate the link performance (e.g., RTT and bandwidth)
according to the network trace. We simulate the communication
between three populated areas, NewYork, Sydney and Beijing.
For relay options in existing cloud platforms, we use the
Amazon EC2 instances located in Oregon, Paris, Ireland,
Singapore and Hong Kong. For relay options in space, we
use the constellation of Starlink Phase I, and assume each
satellite is equipped with ISLs for packet switch.
Reductions of interactive latency. Figure 11 plots the
interactive latency of communication sessions for different
city pairs. The interactive latency calculated form the time
when a video frame is encoded and sent to the transport layer
on the sender, to the time when the same frame is assembled
on the receiver. By exploring the relay options hidden in the
satellite-cloud infrastructure, SCRS effectively reduces the end-
to-end interactive latency by up to 62% for the long distance
communication. The interactive latency is slightly higher than
the one-way packet delay via SNs as we proﬁled in section IV
since it includes the packetization and de-packetization delay
in real-world RTC systems.
VI. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Characterizing network performance of future hybrid
SNs. Unlike previous SN simulators that simulate commu-
nications over GEO satellites (e.g., SNS3 [9]), the current
implementation of our STARPERF platform mainly focuses on
characterizing the network performance of emerging LEO mega-
constellations. However, constructing a hybrid constellation
that integrates satellites working in various kinds of orbit (e.g.,
LEO, GEO and MEO) to collaboratively provide global network
access, is another blooming picture in the evolution of SNs.
We will extend STARPERF to model and proﬁle such kind of
hybrid SNs in the future.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Improving the ﬁdelity of STARPERF. Like other recent
works that study on the network performance of emerging
constellations [19], [27], [31], [32], our performance results
are obtained from the model-based estimation, in which satellite
and orbital conﬁgurations are based on public data released by
satellite operators or the astronomy community [10]. At the time
of this submission (August, 2020), Starlink is still under heavy
deployment and we have no public access to run Internet trafﬁc
over real Starlink constellation. Hence it is very difﬁcult to
compare the network performance obtained by STARPERF with
the corresponding value measured from real Starlink. However,
we will track the evolution of Starlink and other similar mega-
constellations. We will keep upgrading STARPERF to follow
the latest updates in Starlink and other constellations, combine
STARPERF with more ﬁne-grained physical layer models and
improve the ﬁdelity by calibrating the performance results, if
Starlink offers available public access in the future.
VII. RELATED WORKS
We brieﬂy discuss related works in this section.
Modeling and analyzing satellite networks. A body of
previous literatures have studied on the modeling and analysis
on satellite networks [20]–[22], [27], [29], [39], [40], [46]. Del
Portilo et al. have studied on the architectural design [20], [22]
and conducted technical comparison [21] for large LEO satellite
constellations. Sanchez et al. conducted a stakeholder analysis
to identify the main stakeholders of NASAs Space Communi-
cation and Navigation (SCaN) program systems, and explored
the architectural trade-space of the system [43]. These existing
works mainly focus on modeling and analyzing the physical
layer performance under different physical payloads, while
STARPERF characterizes the achievable network performance,
such as area-to-area latency and throughput, under various
constellation options and routing schemes. Brian et al. proposed
to leverage SDN applications to optimally and autonomously
handle aerospace network operations, including steerable beam
control and network routing updates [17]. Moreover, authors
in [27] studied cost-performance tradeoffs in the design space
for Internet routing, and proposed a CDN-inspired routing
mechanism. The cost analysis in [27] complements our study,
and in addition to the design option for routing, STARPERF
also explores the impact of various constellation options on the
ﬁnal network performance. In addition, the community also has
many simulators for SNs. The European Space Agency (ESA)
provided a list of open source software resources for developing
space downstream applications [3]. Most of these open source
projects are designed for positioning and navigation, or earth
observation, while STARPERF focuses on characterizing the
network performance of emerging constellations. SNS3 [9] is a
high-ﬁdelity ns3-based simulator for satellite communications.
However SNS3 is built on a static system conﬁguration, with
only one geostationary satellite and does not support LEO
constellations in its current version.
Routing protocols in satellite networks. Existing studies
working on routing in satellite networks typically fall into
two key categories: (1) inter-domain satellite routing [24], [33],
[37], [48], and (2) intra-domain satellite routing [18], [19], [23],
[25]–[28], [31], [32], [41], [42]. Authors in [33], [48] have
studied and analyzed the inter-domain routing instability that
is caused by the high-speed movement of satellite. In addition,
routing inside a satellite constellation is also a well studied
problem [23], [25], [26], [28], [41]. More recently, as the topic
of using large commercial constellations of LEO satellites has
re-gained popularity, several works have revisited the topology
design and routing in emerging mega-constellations [18], [19],
[27], [31], [32]. Giuliari et al. [27] studied the cost-performance
tradeoffs in the design of routing over satellite networks. These
recently works are mainly built on a certain constellation pattern
(e.g., Starlink). STARPERF complements above researches as it
provides an open platform to explore the performance beneﬁt
of various routing designs and topological decisions.
Relay selection for delay-sensitive applications. Optimiz-
ing the server selection to attain low-latency communication
is a much studied topics in the terrestrial Internet [34], [44],
[47]. While existing works focus on using cloud infrastructures
to construct low-latency path, our work in this paper further
explores the beneﬁts of integrating on-satellite node as the
relay options to reduce end-to-end latency.
Satellite mobility management. Satellite networks repre-
sent a new category of wide-area network where thousands
of satellites move in high speed but connect to each other.
The mobility of satellites is also a well studied problem [16],
[45]. Tsunoda et al. proposed a handover-independent mobility
management scheme speciﬁcally designed for IP/LEO satellite
networks. The basic idea of the proposed approach is to make
IP addresses independent of logical locations and associated
to only geographical location information.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper presents STARPERF, a simulation platform that
enables constellation manufacturers and content providers to
estimate the achievable network performance under a variety
of constellation options. STARPERF makes three contributions:
(1) proposing a novel approach that can proﬁle the time-
varying network performance under different constellation
options; (2) leveraging STARPERF, we evaluate and compare
the performance of three state-of-the-art LEO constellations to
obtain insights on network optimization for mega-constellations;
(3) based on these insights obtained, we further propose an
adaptive relay selection algorithm that intelligently chooses
on-satellite trafﬁc relay to reduce end-to-end communication
latency. Data-driven simulation shows that by properly selecting
a LEO satellite as the network relay, end-to-end communication
latency can be reduced by up to 62%.
IX. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We gratefully appreciate the feedback by the anonymous
ICNP reviewers, and we thank Marco Chiesa for the caring and
shepherding of the paper. This work is supported by NNSFC
61832013 and NKRDPC 2018YFB1800301.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

REFERENCES
[1] Amazon kuiper. https://www.geekwire.com/2019/amazon-project-kuiper-
broadband-satellite/.
[2] Betweenness centrality. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betweenness centrality.
[3] Esa open source software for space downstream applications.
http-
s://www.esa.int/.
[4] Gridded
population
of
the
world
(gpw),
v4.
https://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/collection/gpw-v4.
[5] H3 hexagonal hierarchical spatial index. https://eng.uber.com/h3/.
[6] Linux trafﬁc control. https://linux.die.net/man/8/tc.
[7] Oneweb. https://www.oneweb.world/.
[8] Satellite toolkit agi. https://www.agi.com/products.
[9] Sns3. https://www.sns3.org/content/home.php.
[10] Space-track.org. https://www.space-track.org/.
[11] Spacex successfully launches latest batch of 60 internet-beaming satellites
to orbit. https://www.theverge.com/2020/4/22/21229845/spacex-starlink-
satellites-broadband-falcon-9-rocket-launch-watch-live-stream.
[12] Starlink. https://www.starlink.com/.
[13] Starperf simulator. https://github.com/SpaceNetLab/StarPerf Simulator.
[14] Telesat. https://www.telesat.com/.
[15] Webrtc. https://webrtc.org/.
[16] I. F. Akyildiz, J. McNair, J. S. M. Ho, H. Uzunalioglu, and Wenye Wang.
Mobility management in next-generation wireless systems. Proceedings
of the IEEE, 87(8):1347–1384, 1999.
[17] B. Barritt and W. Eddy. Temporospatial sdn for aerospace communi-
cations. In AIAA SPACE 2015 Conference and Exposition, page 4656,
2015.
[18] D. Bhattacherjee, W. Aqeel, I. N. Bozkurt, A. Aguirre, B. Chandrasekaran,
P. B. Godfrey, G. Laughlin, B. Maggs, and A. Singla. Gearing up for
the 21st century space race. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Workshop
on Hot Topics in Networks, HotNets’18, pages 113–119, New York, NY,
USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
[19] D. Bhattacherjee and A. Singla. Network topology design at 27,000
km/hour.
In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Emerging Networking Experiments And Technologies, pages 341–354,
2019.
[20] I. del Portillo, B. Cameron, and E. Crawley. Ground segment architectures
for large leo constellations with feeder links in ehf-bands. In 2018 IEEE
Aerospace Conference, pages 1–14, 2018.
[21] I. del Portillo, B. G. Cameron, and E. F. Crawley. A technical comparison
of three low earth orbit satellite constellation systems to provide global
broadband. Acta Astronautica, 159:123–135, 2019.
[22] I. del Portillo, M. Sanchez, B. Cameron, and E. Crawley. Architecting
the ground segment of an optical space communication network. In 2016
IEEE Aerospace Conference, pages 1–13, 2016.
[23] E. Ekici, I. F. Akyildiz, and M. D. Bender. Datagram routing algorithm for
leo satellite networks. In Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM 2000. Conference
on Computer Communications. Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of
the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies (Cat. No.00CH37064),
volume 2, pages 500–508 vol.2, 2000.
[24] E. Ekici, I. F. Akyildiz, and M. D. Bender. Network layer integration of
terrestrial and satellite ip networks over bgp-s. In GLOBECOM’01. IEEE
Global Telecommunications Conference (Cat. No.01CH37270), volume 4,
pages 2698–2702 vol.4, 2001.
[25] D. Fischer, D. Basin, K. Eckstein, and T. Engel. Predictable mobile
routing for spacecraft networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
12(6):1174–1187, 2013.
[26] D. Fischer, D. Basin, and T. Engel. Topology dynamics and routing for
predictable mobile networks. In 2008 IEEE International Conference on
Network Protocols, pages 207–217, 2008.
[27] G. Giuliari, T. Klenze, M. Legner, D. Basin, A. Perrig, and A. Singla.
Internet backbones in space.
SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
50(1):25–37, Mar. 2020.
[28] V. V. Gounder, R. Prakash, and H. Abu-Amara. Routing in leo-based
satellite networks. In 1999 IEEE Emerging Technologies Symposium.
Wireless Communications and Systems (IEEE Cat. No.99EX297), pages
22.1–22.6, 1999.
[29] M. Guerster, J. J. G. Luis, E. Crawley, and B. Cameron.
Problem
representation of dynamic resource allocation for ﬂexible high throughput
satellities. In 2019 IEEE Aerospace Conference, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2019.
[30] N. Gvozdiev, S. Vissicchio, B. Karp, and M. Handley. On low-latency-
capable topologies, and their impact on the design of intra-domain routing.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group
on Data Communication, pages 88–102, 2018.
[31] M. Handley. Delay is not an option: Low latency routing in space. In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks,
HotNets ’18, page 85–91, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[32] M. Handley. Using ground relays for low-latency wide-area routing in
megaconstellations. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Workshop on Hot
Topics in Networks, HotNets ’19, page 125–132, New York, NY, USA,
2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[33] W. Ivancic, W. M. Eddy, D. Stewart, L. Wood, P. Holliday, C. Jackson,
and J. Northam. Experience with delay-tolerant networking from orbit.
In 2008 4th Advanced Satellite Mobile Systems, pages 173–178, 2008.
[34] J. Jiang, R. Das, G. Ananthanarayanan, P. A. Chou, V. Padmanabhan,
V. Sekar, E. Dominique, M. Goliszewski, D. Kukoleca, R. Vaﬁn, and
H. Zhang. Via: Improving internet telephony call quality using predictive
relay selection. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGCOMM Conference,
SIGCOMM’16, pages 286–299, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[35] D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz. Dynamic Source Routing in Ad Hoc
Wireless Networks, pages 153–181. Springer US, Boston, MA, 1996.
[36] B. Karp and H. T. Kung.
Gpsr: Greedy perimeter stateless routing
for wireless networks. In Proceedings of the 6th Annual International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, MobiCom’00, page
243–254, New York, NY, USA, 2000. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[37] T. Klenze, G. Giuliari, C. Pappas, A. Perrig, and D. Basin. Networking
in heaven as on earth. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Workshop on
Hot Topics in Networks, HotNets’18, pages 22–28, New York, NY, USA,
2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
[38] H. V. Madhyastha, T. Isdal, M. Piatek, C. Dixon, T. Anderson, A. Kr-
ishnamurthy, and A. Venkataramani. iplane: An information plane for
distributed services. In Proceedings of the 7th symposium on Operating
systems design and implementation, pages 367–380, 2006.
[39] N. Pachler, J. J. G. Luis, M. Guerster, E. Crawley, and B. Cameron.
Allocating power and bandwidth in multibeam satellite systems using
particle swarm optimization.
[40] A. Paris, I. Del Portillo, B. Cameron, and E. Crawley. A genetic algorithm
for joint power and bandwidth allocation in multibeam satellite systems.
In 2019 IEEE Aerospace Conference, pages 1–15. IEEE, 2019.
[41] M. Rajanna, H. Kantharaju, and M. Shiva. Satellite networks routing
protocol issues and challenges: A survey.
International Journal of
Innovative Research in Computer and Communication Engineering,
2(2):153–157, 2014.
[42] Y. Rao and R.-c. Wang. Agent-based load balancing routing for leo
satellite networks. Computer networks, 54(17):3187–3195, 2010.
[43] M. Sanchez, D. Selva, B. Cameron, E. Crawley, A. Seas, and B. Seery.
Exploring the architectural trade space of nasas space communication
and navigation program. In 2013 IEEE Aerospace Conference, pages
1–16. IEEE, 2013.
[44] R. Torres, A. Finamore, J. R. Kim, M. Mellia, M. M. Munafo, and S. Rao.
Dissecting video server selection strategies in the youtube cdn. In 2011
31st International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, pages
248–257, 2011.
[45] H. Tsunoda, K. Ohta, N. Kato, and Y. Nemoto.
Supporting ip/leo
satellite networks by handover-independent ip mobility management.
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 22(2):300–307,
2004.
[46] F. Vidal, H. Legay, G. Goussetis, M. Garcia Vigueras, S. Tubau, and J.-D.
Gayrard. A methodology to benchmark ﬂexible payload architectures
in a megaconstellation use case.
International Journal of Satellite
Communications and Networking, 2020.
[47] P. Wendell, J. W. Jiang, M. J. Freedman, and J. Rexford.
Donar:
Decentralized server selection for cloud services. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGCOMM 2010 Conference, SIGCOMM’10, page 231–242,
New York, NY, USA, 2010. Association for Computing Machinery.
[48] Z. Yang, H. Li, Q. Wu, and J. Wu. Analyzing and optimizing bgp
stability in future space-based internet. In 2017 IEEE 36th International
Performance Computing and Communications Conference (IPCCC),
pages 1–8, 2017.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on February 26,2025 at 02:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

